SIGNIFICANT
SHIPS or 2004

Compiler:
John Lingwood, MRINA

Editor:
Tim Knaggs

Assistant Editor:
Cheryl Saponia, BA Hons

Design/Production Manager:
Sandy Defraine

Group Advertisement Manager:
Debbi Bonner

Advertisement Consultant:
John Labdon

Advertisement Production Manager:
Stephen Bell, PGDip

Marketing Manager:
Adelaide Proctor

Publisher:
Mark J Staunton-Lambert

Published by:
The Royal Institution of Naval Architects

Editorial & Advertisement Office:
 10 Upper Belgrave Street

London SW1X 8BQ, UK

Telephone: +44 (0) 20 7235 4622

Telefax: +44 (0) 20 7245 6959

E-mail: editorial@rina.org.uk advertising@rina.org.uk

© 2005. The Royal Institution of Naval Architects

This publication is copyright under the Berne Convention.
All rights reserved. No part of the publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted without the prior permission of the copyright owner.
Permission is not, however, required to copy abstracts or articles on condition that a full reference to the source is shown.

Multiple copying of the contents without permission is always illegal.

Printed in Wales in by Pensord Press, Tram Road, Pontllanfraith, Blackwood, Gwent NP2 2YA

ISBN 1 905040 06 7

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004

INTRODUCTION

ALGOSCOTIA First Chinese-built ship under Canadian flag
ALMARONA ST's first LPG tanker

ANANGEL INNOVATION Double-skin Capesize bulker from Daewoo 10

ANGELINA AMORETTI Italian products tanker from China
AZZURA Prototype Future-52 standard bulk carrier
BALTICBORG Sto-ro paper carrier with 'green’ credentials
BIRKA PARADISE Caribbean cruises in the Baltic region
BOA DEEP C Complex offshore work ship from Vulcano
BRITISH LIBERTY BP products tanker from Hyundai Mipo
CAP DOUKATO First product of Wismar/Warnemtnde alliance
CARIBBEAN PRINCESS A larger Grand-class liner from Fincantieri
CHIN SHAN New-generation Dunkirk-max bulker
CLIPPER HARVEST Handysize bulker from Hakodate Dock
CMA CGM HUGO 8000-plus TEU container liner from Hyundai
COLOR FANTASY Largest-ever cruise-ferry for Oslo-Kiel service
COPIAPO 5527TEU container liner from Taiwan
CSCL ASIA Samsung-built 8468TEU container liner
DISHA LNG tanker for Qatar-India trade
FURE NORD New Shanghai Edward-built tanker for Sweden
GAZ DE FRANCE ENERGY CS1 containment and
 diesel-electric power
GEESTSTROOM Damenr-built container ship for 45ft boxes
GOLAR VIKING First membrane-type LNG carrier from Hyundai
HAMANASU Fast ro-ro ferry with prototype CRP Azipod installation
HIGH ENDEAVOUR Popular STX tanker design for Italian owner
HIGH POWER Japanese-built tanker with

ME-C diesel propulsion
IRENE SL VLCC from Hyundai Samho
KIISLA Ice-strengthened products tanker from Portugal
MARY ARCTICA Special-purpose container ship for Greenland
METHANE KARI-ELIN Samsung-built LNG carrier for BG
MINERVA LISA Ice-strengthened Aframax tanker
MSC STELLA 6400TEU container liner from Hyundai Samho
NURAGHES Fincantieri-built ro-ro ferry for Sardinia service
PALMALI VOYAGER New-design Russian river/sea cargo ship
POLAR VIKING Fully-refrigerated LPG carrier from Hyundai
PONT-AVEN Brittany Ferries' new flagship
PRESIDENT HEYDAR ALIYEV Large Caspian Sea
 tanker from Russia
PRIMERA Multipurpose inland waterways tanker
PROTEFS Fourth-generation Panamax bulk carrier
RESOLUTION Pioneering wind-farm turbine installations
SAPPHIRE PRINCESS Mitsubishi-built
 cruise liner for Carnival group
SCELVERINGHE Self-discharging sand and gravel dredger
SPAR LYRA First of Graig's Diamond 53 double-skin bulkers
SUOMIGRACHT Side- and top-loading cargo design from Szczecin
TASSILI Il Ferry for Algeria-to-France service
TEH MAY Green Cape bulk carrier
VILLE DE BORDEAUX Ro-ro ship for Airbus parts transport
VOLCAN DE TAMASITE Inter-island ro-ro ferry for the Canaries
WAN QING SHA New Dutch-built dredger for China
WORLD LION New VLCC for World-Wide Shipping
YAMAYURI Collier with conveyor-belt self-discharge system
 3 4 6
 13 16 19 22 26 28 30 32 35 37 39
At 44 46 48 5
 54 56 59 61 63
 66 70 73 75 78 82 84 86 88 91 94
 96 99 101 104
 106 108 110 113 116 118 121 123 125 127 129
 1
ALGOSCOTIA: first Chinese for Canadian flag

Shipbuilder: oo. Jiangnan Shipyard, People's Republic of China
Vessel's name:.......... .... Algoscotia

Hull number: 2291
Owner/operator: wo... Algoma Central Corp, Canada

DeSIQNer: .... cee Skipskonsulent AS, Norway
Model test establishment used: -
Flag
Total number of sister
 ships already completed: ......ccccccccccccecsssesees Nil
Total number of sister ships

SUI] ON OLE cee cecccccececeseseseseeceveveteveeseess Nil

VER the past 30 years, consultant naval architect

Skipskonsulent has enjoyed a steady continuity of work designing small and medium-sized oil tankers.
Much of this activity has been on behalf of Chinese builders, with whom the Norwegian company's
SK5054 design of 16,400dwt product tanker has proved popular. Afoscotia is a slightly enlarged version of this series, developed to suit the requirements of
Canadian owner Algoma Central Corp, and charterer
Imperial Oil (Canadian Exxon), for whom it will trade on the Eastern Canada seaboard, and to Labrador and the Great Lakes.

This vessel is apparently the first flying the Canadian flag to have been built in China, and Skipskonsulent chose to base its new SK4056 project on the SK5054 type, in order to utilise as far as possible, Jiangnan's previous experience building that earlier series, and to make use of its proven hull form and model-test results, The design has a single deck with poop and forecastle, and includes Class 1A ice strengthening, 
It is some 4m longer overall and has almost 1m mote beam than the 5054, but retains what has become a virtual 'trademark' feature of Skipskonsulent's recent tankers: a full height trunk linking the forward and aft erections. This is about B/4 wide, positioned along the centreline, and is integrated into the hull structure to contribute to the longitudinal strength. The trunk encloses the heads of the 12 Framo 500m?/h submersible cargo pumps and the smaller units serving the slop tanks, together with deck heaters, catgo piping, steam heating pipes, hydraulic piping, and other items of equipment benefitting from protection.

Algoscotia has a double-skin hull, divided into six pairs of cargo tanks by a centteline, and transverse bulkheads, all of troughed construction. With deckhead stiffening arranged externally and side framing positioned in the double hull space, the tanks present a plain surface protected by an International Paints epoxy coating. Cargoes of IMO Class II, chemicals and oil products can be carried and these are handled through manifolds positioned about midships. The design has
 been adapted to suit the requirements for trading on the
Canadian east coast, particularly into the St Lawrence
Seaway and Great Lakes, and includes special mooring arrangements and provision of a stern anchor. Landing booms ate fitted at the break of the forecastle to enable mooting ctews to be put ashore at locks, and regulation navigation lights are cartied.

The machinery installation is based on the same 6L46C main engine included in the slightly smaller
SK5054 series. This develops 6300kW at 500tev/min and drives a CP propeller at 120rev/min through a reduction gearbox. All three of these main items in the drive line, and the diesel engines for the alternator sets, are supplied by the Wartsila group. A PTO/PTI on the gearbox connects with a 1500kW Van Kaick alternator, which, supplemented by three diesel-alternatot sets, satisfies the vessel's electrical requirements. Additionally the shaft-driven alternator is arranged so that it can teceive power from the diesel-driven alternator sets, and pass it via the PTI to the gearbox in order to dtive the propeller in an emergency. Approximately 1500kW can be utilised in this way to give a fair weather speed of about 10knots, a feature of increasing relevance to tanker charterers.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa...
Length, bp....
Breadth, moulded ......
Depth, moulded to main deck.
Width of double skin side

Draught
CeSIQN oo. eeeeeeesees scantling .
Gross
Deadweight design 18,000dwt scantling -18,750dwt
Block COCHICIONE 0... ececscessscesssesssecsssecassecsstesssvecsesessees 0.805
Speed, service 14 knots
Cargo capacity
HQUID VOLUME ooo. ceeeceeseestecsessecssesssessesssesssesevessses 21,100m*
Bunkers heavy oil ..573m8
Water ballast . ..8666m>
Classification Det Norske Veritas + 1A1, Tanker for
Chemicals, Tanker for Oil Products, ESP, Ice 1A, W1-OC, EO, VCS-2, TMON
Main engine
Design...
Model ....
Manufacturer
Number...
Type of fuel
Output
Gearbox
Make .. . .Wartsila
Model.. 5CV110-PDCT65
Number...
 newbuild

Output SPCEd eee ceccccsssssesesesstsssessesseeareees 122rev/min
Propeller

Designer/manufacturer............. Wartsila

NUIMIDED:...scsessscssssssnsescessssaedtensuesnensssnsvatsteesescessessessvstacsssoes 1

Pitch... .Controllable

Diameter

Speed 120rev/min
Main-engine driven alternator

NUPPIBGD ssscecsvsssisescscossenenis dénsevsencpncessazssibsconsessevearessoonennos 1

Make/type.. .A Van Kaick/DSU 99 K1-E

Output/speed 1500kW/1200rev/min
Diesel-driven alternators
Number
Engine make.
TYPO wees .1 x 6L20C; 2 x 4L20C
Output/speed. «1 x1020kW/900rev/min 1 x 680kW/900rev/min
Boilers
Number/type.. 1 x oil fired: 1 x composite
Make... Aalborg: 1 x Mission OM/ 1 x Mission OC
Output. 1x 12,000kg/h; 1 x 1500kg/h
Mooring equipment
NUMDEP oo. eecceccsesceseevereseeeen 2 x mooring winch/windlass 3 x mooring winch
Make... ...Rolls-Royce
Type Hydraulic
Cargo tanks
 12 x cargo: 3 x slop tanks ...Oil products ESP, Chemicals nternational, Interline 904 epoxy

Product range.

Coated tanks
Cargo pumps
Framo hydraulic submerged
«12 x SD200 cargo; 1 x SD100 slop
 2x SD125 slop
Capacity... 12 x 500m*/h; 1 x 75m*%/h; 1 x 150m%/h
Ballast/cargo Control SyStOMS........cscccsessseessseeesseecesseee, Framo
Complement
Officers.
Crew......
Bow thruster
Make/type .
Number .
Output.........
Bridge control system
AKC oss eeeseesesesseessscsssesscsseecessesssssessecscsusseaeecarseacae Wartsila
Type... Main engine control panel
One MAN Oper AtiONn oe. ccccccccussecsssessssessseessesssesssesseees Yes

Fire extinguishing systems

Cargo deck...
Engineroom ..
Radars
JAS eoaneea 2
Furuno
 .1 x X-band. FAR 2815 1 x S-band. FAR 2835S
Waste disposal plant
Incinerator

Teamtec ..OG 5400C

Model...
Sewage plan
Make..
Model.
Contract date ...
Launch/float-out date ..
Delivery date...
 .1 June 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
ALMARONA: STX moves into the LPG
 market

Shipbuilder:............ STX Shipbuilding Ltd, Korea
VESSEl'S NAME? oo. eccceecceceeeseeseesseteeeseees Almarona
Hull number:..........
Owner/operator: ....
 ..Qatar Shipping Co Ltd, Qatar

Designer........... STX Shipbuilding Co Ltd, Korea
Model test establishment used:....KRISO (Korea
Research Institute of

Ships and Ocean Engineering), Korea

FAQ! .eeeccceccceeceseeseeeeseeeeseeceeteeecseenetenenes Qatar
Total number of sister
 ships already completed).........ccceeceeee Nil
Total number of sister

Ships Still OM OFer: oo... ee eecceceeteteteeteteeteeees 1

AVING initially sought to re-establish the former

Daedong shipbuilding group (following the latter's unfortunate difficulties some three years ago) by concentrating its output on a base of Panamax bulkers and product tankers, utilising in the main, designs developed by its predecessor, STX Shipbuilding's next step was to diversify into a range of value-added contracts. That move was rewarded with orders for container ships, and for a contract placed in 2002 by
Qatar Shipping for two LPG tankers, on the back of a five-year charter with Qatar Fertiliser Co, covering the transport of ammonia ftom Qatar to India, and neighbouring countties.

The design produced by the STX technical offices features a single-deck vessel with forecastle and single- skin hull, arranged with top and bottom wing tanks in the cargo space. The latter are combined with centrally divided double-bottom tanks and form part of an atrangement given over to water ballast capacity.
Enclosed by this structure are three holds, each containing an IMO Type A, centrally divided prismatic catgo tank, supplied as part of a complete package (which includes pumps, valves and skid-mounted modules) by German specialist Tractebel Gas
Engineering (TGE).

As well as LPG, the tanks are suitable for the carriage of VCM and NH, cargoes (hence the time charter), and were fabricated at a special facility set up by Tractebel in the Jiangnan Shipyard, Shanghai. A subsidiary of TGE was also involved with the contract as designer of the critical steel structures in the vicinity of the cargo area, and of the tanks themselves.

Tractebel's involvement with the cargo containment systems extended to include supervision of construction of the cargo handling plant, which comprises a reliquefaction system of the ditect-cycle type utilising three Sulzer compressors. Inert gas is generated in two plants: a combustion type of 2000Nm'°/h capacity at 99.5% purity, and a membrane- type plant of 100Nm°*/h. Cargo can be unloaded in approximately 13hours by six multi-stage deepwell

Hamworthy pumps rated at 350m*/h, supplemented by two similar sized booster pumps, all driven by deck mounted motors.

The tanks have been fabricated from low-temperature carbon steel (NV2-4) and ate designed to suit gases of maximum density 0.97tonnes/m> and a working temperature of -48°C at 0.25bar pressure. Stainless steel
AISI 316L piping is used, and the system is arranged to handle two segregations. A modification is to be included in the package supplied by TGE for the second vessel, which will see deck tanks fitted. These will allow gas changes to be made between catgoes, thereby increasing trading flexibility.

Almarona has been fitted with a machinery installation centred on a MAN B&W 6S50MC-C (Mk 7) main engine, constructed by the shipbuilder's engineering associate STX Engine Co, which develops 9480kW
MCR at 127rev/min. At 85% of that output, a speed of 17.04knots was attained on trials, 0.50knots above guarantee performance. STX has also supplied the licensed-built prime movers for three Taiyo 900kW alternators.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Length overall ...164.80m
Length, bp.....
Breadth, moulded
Depth, moulded
Draught
 design scantling ..
 .... 16,769dwt .17,446dwt .... 16.50knots

Speed, service (85% MCR).
Cargo capacity

VIQUID VOIUME oo. ceeceececcteeeeeeseteteereseseeeeeeeneneneees 23,166m*
Bunkers
 .34.00tonnes/day ...4.24tonnes/day .Det Norske Veritas +1A1, Tanker for Liquefied Gas, Ship Type 2G (-48°C, 680kg/m°, 0.25bar, 
Nauticus (Newbuilding), EO, TMON, LCS(S,|), Under Water Survey notation shall be applied in accordance with class requirement

Percentage of high-tensile
 main engine only auxiliaries.
Classification .
 steel USed IN CONStFUCTION .....ce cece eetetetes eee eseeeeeee 34%
Main engine
Design .. MAN B&W
Model... ..6S50MC-C (Mk 7)
Manufacturer .STX Engine Co Ltd
NUMDE? ooo. eeeeeeeeseeneeeeceeseeeseseseseeneneesscseeteceesesneeses
Output... 80kW/127rev/min
Propeller
Material... ccceeeereseneeeeneeee Nickel-aluminium-bronze
Designer/manufacturer.......STX Shipbuilding/Nakashima

Diesel-driven alternators
Number....
Engine make/type ..
Output/speed......
Alternator make/type .
Output/speed.............

Composite boiler
Number .
Type...
Make .

OH 3 x 960kW/900rev/min seeteteeee Taiyo/FE547C-8 x 900kW/900rev/min
 p
NUMDET 0. ceeeceeeeeteteeeeeees 2 x mooring winch/windlass 4 x mooring winch
Pusnes

Type...

Cargo tanks
Number
Product range.

Cargo pumps
Number/type ...
Make.....
Capacity

Cargo control system
Make .
 .6 (three pairs) .. Liquid gases
 .6 x electric deepwell

Fiemming ..Hydraulic actuators, computer control

Type...

Ballast control system
Make.. .Danfoss Marine Systems
 ic actuators, mimic control

Suez/repair crew.
Bridge control system
Make .
Type ...
One man operation ....
Fire detection system
Make..
Type ...
Fire extinguishing system
Cargo deck..
 .-HKM/Norcontrol

Radars

Integrated bridge system
Waste disposal system
Incinerator
Make....
Model...
Waste shredder/crusher
Make....
Model...
Sewage plant
Make ...
Model
Contract date..
Launch/float-out date ...
Delivery date

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
ANANGEL INNOVATION: double-skin bulker complying with new hatch cover rules

ShiPbUIICer: «eee eee Daewoo Shipbuilding & Marine Engineering Co Ltd (DSME), Korea
Vessel's name:.. Anangel Innovation

TUNSAUIDONS sisscasssscteateesaivctstcereceecbenee caer eres H1155
Owner/operator: .Anangel Maritime

Services Inc, Greece
Designer:....... wsssss+.,-Daewoo Shipbuilding
 & Marine Engineering Co Ltd, Korea

Model test establishment used: ....SSPA, Sweden
FAQ: sccsssiasStesstee.tscasdsgessyaeededacretsqessonecessteed Greece
Total number of sister
 ships already completed: .......... cece Nil

Total number of sister ships still on order: ..
 (plus 5 for other owners)

LTHOUGH Daewoo's interest in the use of
 double-hull construction for large bulk cartiers is long-standing, this new series of Capesize vessels is amongst the first to be built anywhere which incorporates this form of structure. Typically for this size of bulker, Anangel Innovation is laid out with nine holds, with the surrounding double skin divided into seven wing and bottom tanks designated for carrying water ballast, except for the bottom tanks under Nos 2, 3, and 5 holds which serve as bunker spaces, supplementing side tanks in the engineroom;. they ate separated by longitudinal bulkheads for environmental protection.

Some 55% of the structure is of high-tensile steel, designed for a 30-year fatigue life and in compliance with the latest IACS UR S21 revision 3 regulations, which particularly address the construction and security of hatch covers, coamings, and supporting steelwork in the forward quarter of the vessel. It is understood that these
Daewoo ships are amongst the first new vessels to feature these requirements, many of which classification societies ate now specifying and which must also be retrofitted to existing vessels. Additional weather protection in the perceived vulnerable forward area is derived from a short forecastle.

MacGtegor side-tolling/twin-panel covers are fitted, hydraulically operated by rack-and-pinion drives after first being lifted into the rolling position by Roll-up-Roll mechanisms, and stowed on transverse ramps to port and starboard. The manufactuter's patent Flexi-pad and Flexi- seal supports and packing are used, and automatic wedge cleats secure the covers to the coamings. These ate of heavy-duty design at No 4 hatch where the hold can be filled with water ballast to the coaming top.

The covers have been designed in accordance with class rules to suit the carriage of bulk cargoes in all holds, and to withstand weather loads of 17.2kN/m/; vertical sea
 10
 loads of 88.7kN/m? at No 1 hatch, 59.7kN/m? at No 2, and 34.3kKN/m° elsewhere. Horizontal sea loads of 175kKN/m? ate also allowed for, and the maximum internal loading in No 4 hold when ballast is carried is estimated at 76.7kN/m°.

Anangel Innovation has a bulbous bow, and an open-water sternframe carrying a FP propeller driven by an MAN
B&W 6S70MC-C main engine. This develops 18,620kW
MCR at 91rev/min, and operates at 90% of this value for a service speed of 15.10knots, allowing a sea margin of 15%. Electrical supply is derived from three
Yanmat/Nishishiba 800kW diesel-driven alternator sets.
Crew complement totals 30 persons, and provision is made for carrying a Suez/repair crew of six persons, almost all in single-berth cabins.
TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
LONG, 08 cas icsencctenvattsssciassitbaves ases HE chscaconsestesentepbosetee 289.00m

LENGTH, DP oo. eeesesseesesnesteseeneesecsessecneseeseeseeestesesees 279.00m
Breadth, moulded.. a

Deadweight design ... scantling

Speed, service, 90% MCR, 15% sea margin

Cargo capacity, grain

Bunkers
 15.1knots -.187,000m*
 heavy oil
 diesel oil 250m?
Water Dalllast .......cceseesessecsesseeseeseeseesnessesneeneaneaneed 67,000m°
Fuel consumption

MAIN ENGINE OMY... eee eeeseseeteseeeeseeteseee 66.90tonnes/day
Classification ...........0.. American Bureau of Shipping, +A1(E)

Bulk Carrier, ESP, Strengthened for
Heavy Cargoes, BC-AC, Holds Nos 2, 4, 6, 8 may be empty, FL(30), Grab(35MT), SH, SHCM, +AMS, +ACCU, UWILD
Percentage of high-tensile
 steel USEC IN CONSTUCTION «0.0... cesceseestecteseeseetestesteteseeeee 55%
Main engine

Design.... MAN B&W
Model.....

Manufacturer .
Number..

Output... ..18,620kW/91 rev/min
Propeller

Material Nickel-aluminium-bronze

Designer/manufacturer ... ... Hyundai Heavy Industries

NUMDET...... ees we oa

Speed 91rev/min
Diesel-driven alternators
Number 3

«Yanmar/6N21AL-V 38x 880kW/900rev/min

Engine make/type
Output/speed........

Alternator Make/tyPe ........ceeeseeeeeeeesteseesesseaeesee Nishishiba/-

Output/speed 3 x 800kW/900rev/min
Boilers

NUM ED sccssecscsisstscasciecscosepdesteceees 1

Type vertical, water tube

Aalborg
 ssungugssvmreraiotesveareasapsasspsessonehanesonsesencessersresotens 2tonnes/h

NUMDET 0... eeeeceeseeeeteeeeeeeneeees 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 6 x mooring winch

Fukushima ..low-pressure hydraulic

Lifesaving equipment
Number..
 ..2 X 36-person
Watercraft

Hatch covers
Design/manufacturer

Complement
OPFICETS osc eeseesseesesseesseesecsnessiesectssseesueesseseessessessesseesseese
Crew
Suez/repair Crew 0...
Single/double/other rooms .
Bridge control system
Make...

Type..... ..M-800 III

One-man operation .. ..No
Fire protection system

MaKe) isiecsscvsivoeswstessyastssstencousilsseccesenecarsesscensnseseees Saracom

Type T1000
Fire extinguishing systems

Cargo holds ...

High-expansion foam
 sseeeeseeeeteeeeaeeeaeneee Kashiwa

Integrated bridge system
Make

Waste disposal plant
Incinerator
Make.
Model.
Contract date...
Launch/float-out date ..
Delivery date
 .19 June 2004 ..23 July 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
ANGELINA AMORETTI: German/Chinese co-operation on Italian product tanker

Shipbuilder:...Jiangsu Yangzijiang Shipbuilding, People's Republic of China

Vessel’S NAME! occ Angelina Amoretti

Hull NUMDES: eee eee YZJ02-654Y1

Owner/operator:.....m.e. Maritima Emiliana any

Italy

Designer:......... INEC GmbH (International Naval

Architecture, Engineering & Consulting), 
Germany

Model test establishment used: ............0. HSVA, 
Germany

Italy
 ships already completed: .....0... cece Nil
Total number of sister
 ships still ON OPPs... cece cee reteeeeees Nil
 | IEL-based consultancy INEC's cooperation with
Chinese shipyards stretches back over a decade, and has included not only basic and conceptual design work, but overseeing the construction of new ships.
Last year, in association with trading house SUMEC, its responsibilities included Branca Amoretti, a 29,950dwt product tanker built at the Chengzi Shipyard for
Amoretti (Significant Ships of 2003), and follow on now with a smaller sister, Angelina Amoretti. Built to comply with specified parameters for overall length, minimum deadweight and speed, the result is a design with an unusual L/B ratio and a high block coefficient.
Hull form has been optimised by CFD calculations, and model tests for low fuel consumption, good seakeeping, minimum vibrations and manoeuvrability were carried out. As well as meeting statutory and classification regulations, the new design complies with ExxonMobil requirements, such as the fitting of suitable mooring arrangements and an ability to put 12 mooring lines ashore. Emergency towage facilities are provided forward and aft, and a 2000kN strong point is fitted forward.

In a change from Bianca Amoretti, cargo is handled by a Hamworthy deepwell pump in each tank. Like the piping installation, these are of stainless steel. A new system of ‘super’ stripping, which leaves virtually no residuals, has been included, and particular attention paid to tank cleaning, with permanent tank-washing machines fitted.

Remote level, temperature, and pressure monitoring and control of each tank is cartied out by Saab equipment which is linked to a Kongsberg/Norcontrol integrated automation system, and operated from workstations on the bridge, and in the cargo and engine control rooms. High-quality monitoring equipment serves the double-hull space and oil tanks, and fresh and dry-air ventilation lines are installed on deck, complete

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
 with valves and connections for portable hoses, in way of each ventilation hatch.

A Wartsila 12V38B main engine has been selected for Angelina Amoretti, developing 8700kW at 600rev/min and driving a CP propeller by way of a vertically offset reduction gearbox which also connects with a 1200kW shaft-driven alternator. With the main engine de-clutched, this unit can serve as an auxiliary motor for emergency propulsion in accordance with
RINa notation AVM-APS, and produce a speed of
Tknots. Service speed at 85% MCR, allowing 15% sea margin, is 15.80knots. Three 1000kW diesel-driven alternator sets are fitted, and two 600kW bow thrusters and a semi-balanced rudder benefit manoeuvrability.
Provision has been made for the future fitting of an
SCR emissions converter with a urea plant in the funnel.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa... aia
Length, bp....
Breadth, moulded -
Depth, Moulded oo... ccccccceeeseeessssesesseeeeeeessenes 13.09m
Width of double skin

Draught
 design.. 8.20m
 scantling . .9.50m
Deadweight design . .18,850dwt
 scantling............. .23,740dwt
Speed, service, 85% MCR, 15% sea margin.......15.80knots
Cargo capacity
 liquid volume .. 27,272m*
Bunkers
 heavy oil... 730m°
 diesel oi
Water ballast.
Percentage of segregated ballast...

Fuel consumption main engine only auxiliaries (unloading ... 10tonnes/day
Classification ........... Registro Italiano Navale (RINa), C + Oil
Tanker, Chemical Tanker, ESP, Unrestricted Navigation, +STAR
Hull, +STAR MACH, +AUT-UMS, +AUT-PORT, +AUT-IMS, CLEAN SEA, CLEAN AIR, COVENT, INWATERSURVEY, MANOVR, MONSHAFT, +SYS, CARGO CONTROL, VCS, +AVM-APS

Percentage of high-tensile steel
 ...41tonnes/day

USEC IN CONSEFUCTION oo. eee cee ee reece este eeteeeeseseensees 30%
Main engine
Design. Wartsila
Model... 12V38B
Manufacture! Wartsila
NUMDE? oo. eeceeccee ce escseeeeseseseeeesetessssssesesenecavesssseseeeraseess 1
Type of fuel used ..HFP 380cSt
Output 8700kW/600rev/min
Gearbox
MAKE ooo ceceeececececeteeeeseetensesesescseeeeesesesesesesseneees Wartsila

Model ... SCV128-PDCT65

Number . 1

OUtPUt SPEED oo. eee ete eset terete 105rev/min
Propeller

Material ..Nickel-aluminium-bronze

Designer/manufacturer . Lips

Number .

Special adaptations...

Main-engine driven alternator
Number .
Make/type

Diesel-driven alternators

Engine make/type..

OULPUY/SPOO cxsscsscxvses casweasazs ovanes eroavenaes onpesesene 3 x 1060kW

Alternator make/type . .. Hyundai HFJ6 566-84E-OY

Output/speed 3 x 1000kW/900rev/min
Boilers

Number. .2 x thermal oil heater; 1 x exhaust gas

Mak Cssssssssssiscesssvsssarestevesnncssorssesesemsomas se va nse e soit Aalborg

Output... «2 X A4650kKW; 1 x 1045kW
Mooring equipment

Number.... ...2 x mooring winch/windlass
 4 x mooring winch

Make/type.......ssssecseeees Kocks/high-pressure hydraulic
Cargo tanks

Number.....

Grades of cargo carried .
Product range......Oil products and IMO II and Ill chemicals
Tank coating .. Phenolic epoxy

Piping AISI 316L with 2.7% Mo
Cargo pumps

NUMber/ty Pe... ci scssesscessssssssasscnssvtaeseans ses 14 +2 deepwell

Type... .14 x DW 150/200-4-k; 2 x DW 100/100-4-k

Make.. Hamworthy KSE

Material AISI 316L stainless steel

Capacity ... 14 x 300m*/h; 2 x 100m*%/h

Cargo control system Rizzi Valvole
Ballast Control SYStOM ......ccccceseceseereteteeeteteeteneenees Danfoss
Complement...
Bow thrusters

Fire detection system
Make..
Type...

Fire extinguishing system
Cargo deck/engineroom .........c Greathorse Seaspan

Waste disposal plant
Incinerator

MAK6 0... cssccecseneneesessnsenssountienabisia caaeaaainaaia sé Teamtec

Sewage plant

Make ...

Contract date .

Launch/float-out date .

Delivery date cies ceeneese eerste sscseesecesscsseeeresessseeee -

Jowa

AZZuURA

AZZURA: new F-class bulker series
 from IHI

Shipbuilder: .....0.. cee IHI Marine United Inc
 (Yokohama yard), Japan
VeSSEl'S NAME! cccccceceeeceeteeteeteeteeteeneees Azzura
Hull No... eee 3195

Owner/operator: . Cello Inc/AM Nomikos
Transworld Maritime SA, Greece ..IHI Marine United Inc, Japan

Designer:.
Flag: .....
Total number of sister

Total number of sister ships still on order: ...

T is hard to believe that it is amost 40 years since

Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries (now IHI
Martine United), in collaboration with the Canadian- based consultancy G T R Campbell, first introduced the innovative Freedom Liberty-Ship Replacement design to the shipping world. The huge success of that 15,000dwt cargo vessel provided a platform from which IHI/Campbell went on to develop a range of F- class standard designs: Fortune, Friendship, Freedom
Mk II, and ultimately the Future series of bulk cartier, designated with the appendage -32, -42, and -48, to denote their nominal deadweight capacity. Close to 100
Futures have now been built or are on order, with
Agzura continuing the sequence as the prototype of a seties of Future-52 (52,000dwt) bulk carriers which follow in the tradition of easy operation and maintenance which has characterised the earlier designs.

Over the years, an overall length of just less than 190m has become an important benchmark for
Handymax bulk carriers, and the Future-52 conforms with that restriction, and to the Panamax 32.20m beam dimension. The hull is single-skinned with top and bottom wing tanks, the latter being common with side double-bottom tanks formed from a space divided into port, starboard and centre compartments. The single deck is flat from aft to the No1/2 hold division, but features a substantial straight-line sheer forward from here, affording protection in lieu of a forecastle. The rising deck line over No 1 hold has resulted in No 1 hatch being at a higher level than those serving other holds.

Five cargo holds are arranged, closed by Tsuji weathertight folding hatch covers, and suitable for the carriage of a wide range of cargoes with steel coils and long products readily accommodated. Grain cargoes can be loaded with untrimmed ends due to the inclusion of the top and bottom wing tanks. As with most IHI
 16
 standard designs, cargo handling equipment is provided, in this case 4 x 30tonnes swl Tsuji hydraulic deck cranes, located between hold numbers 1/2; 2/3; 3/4; and 4/5.
They ate capable of operating with grabs and are erected on high pedestals to facilitate carriage of deck cargoes.

The main engine is of Sulzer 6RTA48T-B design, built by IHI subsidiary Diesel United Ltd, and developing 8100kW at 124rev/min MCR. At 85% of that output, the available power of 6885kW/118rev/min, drives the ship at 14.70knots by means of a Nakashima propeller, aided by a Low
Viscous Fin developed by IHI and claimed to produce energy savings between 2% and 3%. Electrical power comes from three STX-MAN B&W/Nishishiba diesel- alternator sets, each of 520kW rating, and steam is raised in a Miura composite boiler.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Length, oa
Length, bp....
Breadth, moulded ..
Depth, moulded to upper deck

Draught
 design .
 scaniling . ‘i
Gross... .29,407gt
Displacement .. 60,902tonnes
Lightweight... ...8912tonnes
Deadweight
 scantling ..52,050dwt

Speed, service, at 85% MCR... .14.70knots
Cargo capacity grain bale
Bunkers heavy oil.. diesel oil..
Water ballast... ccc eeseeeeteeeeesesseneecee
Fuel consumption main engine only .. auxiliaries ...
Classification
 ..27.60tonnes/day ...1.70tonnes/day
Nippon Kaiji Kyokai (Class NK), NS Bulk Carrier, PS, MNS*, MO
Percentage of high-tensile steel

USEC IN CONSTIUCTION ...... cece ee eeeeeeeteeeeseeseeerereeieseeed 60%
Main engine
Design. Sulzer
MOE] oo. eeeceeeeseeceseetereeteterteeetssesseerseessseeaseesseeee 6RTA48T-B
Manufacturer . .Diesel United Ltd
NUMDET oe eee eeeereeeteteneeeseeeeeeeeeueeeeeseesueeeeeeeunees 1
Type of fuel. ..Heavy fuel oil
Output . .8100kW/124rev/min
Propeller
Material Nickel-aluminium-bronze

Designer/manufacturer HI Marine United/Nakashima

Number

Engine make/type .

TYPO OF TUS sas ccdisiit csscssscttens snases seneseteesnossanseni disvensdtee terete HFO

Output/speed.. ..3 x 570kKW/720rev/min

Alternator make/type Nishishiba/NTAKL

Output/speed 3 x 520kW/720rev/min
Boiler

Number
Type..

Make...
Output ....Oil fired, 1.5tonnes/h: exhaust gas, 1.2onnes/h
Cargo cranes
Number
Make .
 grab: 24tonnes/21m/min

Mooring equipment
NUMDET oo. ceeeeeeteteeeeeeeeeee 2 x mooring winch/windlass 2 x mooring winch
Electric-hydraulic svecentensassctecaesetall IHI

Type..

Tsuji Heavy Industries ..End-folding, hydraulic, four-panel

Type
Complement
Officers.

Bridge control system
Make ....
Type...
One man operation

Fire detection system

Make.. ....Nohmi Bosai

Type... .FAC 511B-25L
Fire extingishing systems

Cargo holds/eEnginerooM ........:.cceeeeseteeeeseeteeeneeee Unitor
Radars

Integrated bridge SYStOM ........cscssessceessectcsessesesceneseees No
Waste disposal plant
Incinerator
Make...
Model .
Waste shredder/crusher
Make sss coves sedis stvsevs isd sovscuanvesasanssesssveees Ushio Reinetsu
Sewage plant
Make...
MOE)... ee eeeeecesesee ee eeseneseeeeensesesessseeneneneseseeseee STB-25
Contract date........
Launch/float-out date ..
Delivery date
 -BGW-30N

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
BALTICBORG: 'green’' sto-ro paper and container carrier

Shipbuilder:..... ee Volharding Shipyards, The Netherlands (hull from Daewoo
Mangalia, Romania)

Vessel'’S NAME? oo... eens Balticborg
Hull NUMBE?: ............. seesnsesssstsanscsstavesssosaseess 528
Owner/operator: ...........6 Wagenborg Shipping
 (Royal Wagenborg), 
The Netherlands

Designers: ....Volharding/Wagenborg/Conoship, The Netherlands

Model test establishment used: ...........6 SSPA, 
Sweden

FAQ! o.eeeceeceeeeeeteeeeeteteeees ... The Netherlands
Total number of sister
 ships already completed: .......... cece Nil
Total number of sister
 ships still ON OPP: oo. e eee eeeeeeeeee 1

Sect requirements for the carriage of paper and forest products catgoes have introduced numerous innovative ship designs over recent years, with many featured in our Significant Ships reviews. Balticborg, and sister Bothniaborg, represent two of the latest examples of this type. They have been introduced into the
European distribution network of Swedish packaging manufacturer Kappa Kraftliner, on charter from Dutch shipping and logistics group Wagenborg, With one end of this operation fixed on Baltic and northern Gulf of
Bothnia loading ports, the design necessarily includes strengthening to ice class 1A (Swedish/Finnish rules), and insulation of relevant parts of the ship against ambient temperatures of around -35 C.

Like other Dutch yards, Volharding today finds it advantageous to subconttact construction of many of its hulls to overseas yatds, and that of Ba/ticborg otiginated in the Mangalia, Romania, shipyard of
Daewoo. It is laid out with tanktop, main and upper decks, and a double-skin side and bottom structure containing water ballast and fuel tanks, together forming two box-shaped, 'tweendeck cargo spaces (holds) extending over most of the vessel's length and equipped with mechanical ventilation and dehumidifying systems.

Cargo loading is by way of a 16m long by 17.3m wide, single-section stern door/ramp at main deck level.
Entry through the starboard side of the stern opening serves the main deck, and also gives direct access to an internal fixed ramp connecting with the upper (weather) deck. From the port side of the stern opening, another fixed ramp takes traffic down to the lower hold (tanktop), closed at main deck level by a side-hinged, hydraulically operated watertight and gastight cover.

Cargo is loaded in paper reel and pulp-package form, using forklift trucks of 15.8tonne axle loading, Mafi trailers of 32tonnes, or road trailers of 20tonnes load.
Uniformly distributed deck loadings are 2.5tonnes/m?* on the weather deck and 5tonnes/m? elsewhere.
Container capacity on the open weather deck is 180TEU.

A three-tier deckhouse is arranged right forward, housing a complement of 14, topped by a navigating bridge and merged at the house front with a whaleback shelter over the mooring deck. The engineroom is located aft and contains the Wartsila 9L46 main engine.
This develops 9450kW MCR at 500rev/min and drives a CP propeller at 141rev/min through a Flender gearbox, from which a power take-off serves a 755kW alternator, and there are three 532kW diesel-driven sets.
A computerised Wartsila Engine Control system (WECS) monitors and controls the installation which is

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
 designed to run on low sulphur fuel (<1%) and has
NOx emissions reduced to <2g/kWh by Munters selective catalytic reduction (SCR) gas treatment equipment.

The machinery space is served by twin 'funnels' built into the structure each side of the upper deck. The starboard arrangement is an aesthetic feature only, with engine exhausts discharging to port. Connecting the two funnels above the upper deck, is a transverse, two- part, 550tonne ballast tank, the main component of a
Flume passive anti-roll system, designed to reduce high
GM values apparent under certain loading/ discharging; partial load, and ballast conditions.

Balticborg is believed to be one of the first vessels awatded the BV 'Clean Sea' and 'Clean Air’ notations, and her design was subjected to an Environmental
Effect Analysis by Wagenborg. In addition to the machinery benefits noted above, sludge collection and separation has been addressed; potentially polluted, on- deck sea and rain water is collected in a zero dumping tank and filtered before overboard discharge, and a
Hamworthy biological vacuum sewage plant complies with BV and Canadian Lakes requirements.

Occupational health issues have been considered in the accommodation design; pollution problems resulting from volatile organic compound (VOC) emissions from paint have been reduced and only solvent-free and water-based coatings used where possible. The cathodic protection systems employ cadmium-free aluminium anodes, and the electric cables do not contain halon.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa... sen
Length, bp....
Breadth, moulded
Depth, moulded to main deck.. to upper deck
Width of double skin

Draught design/scantling
GIOSS .ecsssssaees
Displacement
Lightweight...
Deadweight, design
 10,254dwt

Block CoeffICIONt eee cece tees eeteteseseseeteneseseneeed 0.719
Speed, service at 90% MCR; 20% sea margin.... ... 16.50knots

Cargo capacity (bale upper hold .. lower hold ...

Bunkers heavy oil.. diesel oil.. :

Water ballast (including Flume tank)... ..7824m°

Fuel consumption (main engine only) .........19.50tonnes/day

Classification Bureau Veritas +1 3/3 E Unrestricted
 lavigation, Ro-Ro Cargo Ship, + Mach, + Hull, CNC-1, Aut-UMS, IWS, PFA, 
Clean Sea 7, +Clean Air, +Veristar Hull, Ice Class 1A (Swedish/Finnish rules)

Percentage of high-tensile
 steel used in construction ..

Heel control system

Roll-stabilising equipment.

Main engine
Design..
Model...
 ..Framo heeling pump
Flume tank

Type of fuel used HFO380 (low sulphur)

Output ....9450kW/500rev/min
Gearbox

Make....

Model...

Output speed.. 141 rev/min
Propeller

Material ..Nickel-aluminium-bronze

Designer/manufacturer .
 .Wartsila Propulsion
NUMDET «ucts 1

Special adaptations...
Main engine-driven alternator

Number....

Make/type ...A Van Kaick/OSG 86M1-4

Output/SPeed.... cece 755kW/1000-1500rev/min
Diesel-driven alternators

Engine make/type..

Type of fuel.........
Alternator make/type .
Output/speed..
Exhaust gas scrubbing equip
Manufacturer

TYPO veers

On main engine?
Boiler

Number .

Make .

Output...
Mooring equipment

NUMDE? oe eee eet eeeee 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 4 x mooring winch

Make . Brusselle

Type... Electric/hydraulic
Lifesaving equipment

Number. .2 X 30-person lifeboats

Make Hatecke
Containers

TOtal .oeeeeceecesecestesestesnsneseesesesseesseeesneerereeteneeseneesenes 180TEU
Doors/ramps

NUMDED 0. cece eee eeeeteeeeeeeneneees 1 x stern door/ramp
 1 x fixed ramp to upper deck 1 x fixed ramp to tanktop 1 x internal ramp cover

Complement
Officers..

Supernumaries/spare .

SueZ/TePail CLOW... eeeesceeceeseeeeeseseseeresessseseseseetsceeeseeeseeess
Special rudder
Bow thrusters

Wartsila Propulsion 2 x 500kW

Wartsila Propulsion deceeeeseeneneenes 1 x 500kW

SAM Electronics
Nacos 35-4, integrated bridge
One-man operation? .. Yes
Fire detection system
Make..
Type ..
Fire extinguishing systems
Areas..
Type...
Make .
Radars
Number .
Make .

Sewage plant
Make ...
Model..

Contract date .

Launch/float-out date

Delivery date
 .December 2001
September 2003 9 June 2004
 19
BIRKA PARADISE: offering Caribbean cruises in the Baltic!

Shipbuilders... eee Aker Finnyards Oy (Rauma yard), Finland
Birka Paradise
 442

Owner/operator: .....Birka Line Ab/Birka Cruises, 
Finland

FAG... ncesntcnsscsansses ties sansa wants scmrs Finland
Total number of sister
 ships already completed)... cece Nil
Total number of sister
 ships still ON Order: oo... eee Nil

LTHOUGH Birka Paradise has entered service
 primarily as consort to the 1986-built Birka Princess, as a passenger-only ferry operating between Stockholm and Mariehamn in high season, and on other Baltic routes in the winter, she does subscribe to being more than just another 'cross-channel’ link available to the increasing number of passengers travelling on one of
Europe's busiest ferry-routes each year, by offering a taste of more exotic locations. The nickname 'Floating
Caribbean! has already been given to this fully cruise- orientated vessel on account of an unusual design concept, which is centred on the simple fact that if a sea voyage in the Baltic winter climate does not readily offer the same attractions as a dream cruise in the
Caribbean, then let the ship create the illusion!

Accommodation is provided in 734 cabins and suites for 1800 passengers on five of the total 11 decks, and for them, the fantasy of a holiday in sunnier climes begins with an introduction to the facilities provided for their well-being, such as a variety of public rooms, all exhibiting that much-sought-after exotic atmosphere, and named accordingly: the Havana Cigat Club, Café
Brazil, and Club Copacabana. The tropical flavour extends to the nine restaurants, numerous bats and two night clubs - one of which features the largest dance floor on the Baltic, swimming pool and spa.

Conference facilities and an extensive duty-free shopping ateas are also available; however, what really brings the Caribbean to the Gulf of Finland is ‘Paradise
Beach,' an area on deck 10 where the tropical island environment has been re-created by enclosing the Sun
Deck under a retractable glass roof and, in winter, using an ‘artificial sun' to reproduce better-than-natural conditions by introducing the warmth, but with 90%
UV radiation removed first. In summer, the home climate provides its own attractions, and the roof is opened to admit the Baltic sun.

Birka is noted for an environmentally-friendly approach to its operations, and this is evidenced in aspects of the basic design, such as the specifying of exhaust-gas catalysers, closed sewage plants and atoxic bottom painting. The hull form has been developed with special attention to wave formation and bottom suction in order to reduce damage around the sensitive
Baltic coastline, and DNV's Clean Design and Comfort
Class rules, defining environmental solutions and noise
 22
 and vibration limits, have also been followed.

Birka Paradise is fitted with four Wartsila 6L46 main engines, each developing 5850kW at 500rev/min. These are arranged in port and starboard pairs, each split fore and aft between two enginetooms. The foremost pait is inboard of the aftermost, and the respective shaft lines, P&S, connect in twin-input/single-output gearboxes to drive the two CP propellers. Electrical power comes from four Wartsila /Leroy-Somer 3312kVA alternators - three fitted in the forwatd engineroom and one in the aft compartment.

Vatious Rolls-Royce subsidiaries have supplied items of machinery: notably Kamewa propellers, Kamewa-
Ulstein bow and stern thrusters, Rolls-Royce Marine steering gears, and Rauma Brattvaag deck machinery.
Passenger comfort is enhanced by a pair of B+V
Industrietechnik stabilisers, and two paits of heel control tanks are provided. Passenger movement between decks within the ship features six MacGregor 15-person lifts, and lifesaving equipment includes four
Viking MES stations with chutes and liferafts for 1400 persons. Other inflatable rafts cater for 500 persons, and four partially enclosed 150-person lifeboats, supported by two fast rescue craft, are carried.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
LONGth, 08 vo. eccceccecece cece rseesscsssenenseesseeceeseneeeeseeeee
Length, bp .
Breadth, moulded ....
Depth, moulded to main deck (No 3)... to upper deck (No 6).
Draught design scantling ..
Gross
Deadweight
 heavy oil... diesel oil...
Water ballast ballast/grey water
Classification
 .Det Norske Veritas +1A1, Passenger Ship, Ice
 1A%*, Finnish Ice Class 1A Super, COMF-V(2), Clean Design, RP, EO. PMS, TMON

Heel Control SYStOM.........ccceeees 2 pairs of heeling tanks
Roll-stabilisation equipment
Type... .One pair of folding fins

Make . ....B+V Industrietechnik

Main engines

HFO 380cSt/50°C 4 x 5850kW/500rev/min

Output speed...

Propellers
Material Stainless steel
Designer/manufacturer .. Kamewa (Rolls-Royce Ab)
Number . 2
Pitch... .Controllable
 --4600mm 53rev/min

Diameter
 ..Wartsila/6L32 4 x 2760kW/750rev/min

Engine make/type
Output/speed...

Alternator make/type ..........cccceeeeeeee Leroy Somer/LSA

Output/speed «4 x 3312kVA/750rev/min
Boilers

Number/type .... 2 x oil fired

Make/output ..Aalborg/2 x 6000kg/h
Mooring equipment

NUMDET oe eeeeteeeeeeseteteteeeeeeee 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 4 x mooring winch

Make .. ..Rauma-Brattvaag (Rolls-Royce Ab)

Type.... electric
Lifesaving equipment

Number . ..4x MES stations with chutes

MK Ci osc sccssencrssmnsrnasesensernersan iss anvecse naavseraseerannavereess Viking
 ..4 x 150-person lifeboats 2 x fast rescue craft
Make... cececccesceeseseseeseeeseeseseeessseneieeeeneeees Schat-Harding
 .6 x 15-passenger; 4 x 1600kg service
MacGregor

Complement
Officers...
Crew...

Passengers..
Cabins

Passengers.

Bow thrusters

Manufacturer
Output
Stern thruster
 ..Kamewa-Ulstein (Rolls-Royce) 1000kW
Integrated bridge system
Make ...
Model..
One man operation .
Fire detection system...
Fire extinguishing system
Engineroom...

Consilium Marine Ab

CO,/ extended local fog system
Unitor/Marioff
Water/sprinklers
Make oo. eeceeeceeeeeeeeeetseseeseeeenenes Aker Finnyards/Marioff

STN/Atlas

Number/type . ..2 X ARPA S-band; 1 x ARPA X-band
Waste disposal plant

Make... Deerberg

Types... 1 x compactor; 2 x shredders; 1 x crusher
 ..19 November 2002 ...16 April 2004
November 2004

Contract date ..
Launch/float-out date
Delivery date

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
BOA DEEP C: operations

Shipbuilder: .Factorias Vulcano SS, Spain

Boa Deep C 485

Hull number: . wee
Owner/operator ..Boa Offshore AS, Norway
De@SIQNEM: oo. eeeeeeeeeee Vik-Sandvik AS, Norway oc \ 0 Spain
Total number of sister
 ships already completed:..........cccccceeees Nil
Total number of sister

Ships still ON OFder: wo... ccc ccecceeesecseceeeseeseeeees 1

FTER some years of specialisation with chemical
 tankers, Factorias Vulcano saw an opportunity to move into the offshore market which was rewarded by a contract for two specialist support vessels, designed mainly for operations in the subsea market, tackling mooring systems, pipeline repairs, template and anchor installations worldwide, where particular benefit is derived from the vessel's ability to work at previously inaccessible sea depths of up to 2000m. Boa Deep C was designed by Norwegian consultant Vik-Sandvik and is of this consultancy's standard VS4201 OCV type. She is thus laid out with a heavily built-up superstructure forward, extending over half the vessel's length, and a working deck aft. The main machinery is installed around midships in two separate enginetooms to allow total redundancy for the AUTRO notation, and there is a cargo hold further aft.

The deck area measures 1150m?, and has a load capacity of 15tonnes/m*. It is served by two offshore cranes (1 x 250tonnes; 1 x 30tonnes) both of which are heave-compensated, and 2 x 15tonne; 1 x 8.4tonne and 1 x 6.3tonmne marine cranes. A deepwater towing/anchor handling winch with a 500tonne line pull is provided, whilst the stern roller has a downward pull of 750tonnes and a bollard-pull rating of 260tonnes. The mooring and anchoring equipment includes two mooring winch/windlasses forward and two capstans aft, with various tugger winches, guide winches and powered guide pins also installed. A 7.2m? moonpool is another feature of the design.

Boa Deep C can operate in three different propulsion modes: using a diesel-mechanical combination for normal steaming; diesel-mechanical with electric booster for maximum bollard pull; and diesel-electric for dynamic-positioning. For the first option, two
Caterpillar 3616-V16 units, each developing 6000kW, drive the main shafts and two CP propellers working in nozzles, through Scana Volda gearboxes. For maximum
 26
 support vessel for subsea
 bollard pull, this output can be boosted by 3000kW on each shaft, derived from a pair of alternators/electric motors using combined PTI/PTOs on the gearboxes.
For DP operations, additional electrical demand is satisfied from four auxiliary gensets. A harbour set and an emergency set are also installed, with the complete installation using Siemens electrics fitted with
Caterpillar prime movers from the 3600 series.

The requirements of the Kongsberg Class 3 dynamic positioning system are met from two tunnel-type thrusters at each end of the vessel, and additionally, an azimuthing unit forward - all supplied by Brunvoll and with CP operation. Three are also arranged with conttollable speed. Other features of the design include an anti-heel system, Hoppe active roll-reduction tanks, a helideck suitable for a Puma helicopter, cable storage drums, and fresh water, and oil storage tanks. Two remote-controlled vehicles (RCV) are carried, and a stowage hangar is provided. The accommodation block is arranged for a normal crew of 50, and an additional 50 special personnel, housed in a total of 90 cabins.
Facilities available include a full suite of office and conference rooms, a sauna, and a gymnasium.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Length, oa...... .-119.30m

Length, bp........... 102.00m
Breadth, moulded ..27.00m
Depth, moulded ..11.60m
GIOSS  scsrextdl tee ere eh .12,741gt
Draught, design 8.80m
Displacement ...17,985tonnes
Lightweight.... ..9493tonnes
Deadweight, design . 8492dwt
Speed, service, 80% MCR .......seseseseseseseeeeeeseseeeseeneees 13.00knots
 maximum 17.60knots
RANGE :...6..c.00000s -9500nautical miles
Fuel CONSUMPTION 00.0... eeeeeeteecseeeeeeeeseseeeeneees 130tonnes/day

Det Norske Veritas +A1, Ice C, EO, Tug Supply
Vessel, SF, HELDK, Dynpos, AUTRO, CLEAN. Comfort Class rating 3, register notations dk(+), hl (p), TMON

Main engines/alternators
Engine make/type...

Classification
 .Caterpillar 3616-V16

Number .

Output...

Alternators/booster motors

Make/type . ....Siemens/-
Output 2 x 3000kW

Gearboxes (fitted with PTI/PTO connection to alternators)

Make/type.... ..Scana Volda ACG 1080
Number ss we a2
Output speed (to propellers)... cece 140rev/min
Propellers

Material ..copper-nickel-aluminium
Manufacturer ... Scana Volda
NUMDE? cccssssssassascascsscess . 2
Pitch ....Controllable
Diameter ..

Speed... sees

Special adaptions...
Generating sets
Auxiliary sets (A)
Engine make/type....

Number...

Alternator make... ..Siemens
Output .. x 2760kVA

Auxiliary sets (B)

Engine make/type.......c.ccseceeeeeeneeeee Caterpillar/3606
NUMDET oe eee eeeeeeecesesesneeeeeeseeeseseeneneneneseseseseeeaeeeees 2
Alternator make . seseeees Siemens
OUDUE oe eeeeecteteeeseseeeetesesesesesesneteesesess 2 x 2020kVA

Harbour set
Engine make/type
Number
Alternator make.
Output
Emergency set
Engine make/type
Number
Alternator make...
Output .......

Bow thrusters
 wa Brunvoll

Number ...2 X tunnel; 1 x azimuth

Output... «2 X 1425KW/1 x 1200kW
Stern thrusters

Make ......... Brunvoll

NUIMB GMa ss icBaschiercateccdsa tes eccte Bes eFeceiee 2 x tunnel

Output........... v2 X 1425kKW
Offshore cranes

MAKG 0... ececsssesesesscesnscsberesensssasecsnsasneee Hydralift

NUMDET...0. eee eeteeeeeeeeeeeeteees 1 x 250tonne; 1 x 30tonne
Marine cranes

Make 2 x TTS/2 x Palfinger

Number.. .2 x 15tonne/1 x 8.4tonne/1 x 6.3tonne
Mooring/anchoring equipment

Numbet/type uu... cece 2 x mooring winch/windlass;
 1 x guide winch; 2 x capstan

Mak@ ii scdcsocssvisesstestsassccbeces Rolls-Royce
Anchor handling and towing

Number/type.........1 x 500tonne towing/anchor handling;
 4 x tugger winches ....Rauma Brattvaag
December 2000

Make
Contract date ..
Launch/float-out date
Delivery date..........
 ....December 2003

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
BRITISH LIBERTY: Hyundai
Mipo product tanker for BP

Shipbuilder: ..... Hyundai Mipo Dockyard Co Ltd, Korea
VeSSEl'S NAME? oo. ecccccceeeseeteetees

Hull number
Owner/operator. ....
Shipping Ltd, UK
De@SIQNEN: occ Hyundai Mipo Dockyard
Co Ltd, Korea
Model test establishment used:............. Hyundai

Maritime Research Institute (HMRI), Korea

FIAQ! cocceeceecececeeesteeees ...[sle of Man
Total number of sister ships already completed:.......cccccccccceeceees 5

Total number of sister
SHIPS Still ON OFEP: oo. cece ceecseeseesseceeseeeeeees (plus 3 modified sigh)
 iF is no more than a decade since Hyundai Mipo
Dockyard (HMD) diversified from its shiprepair/ conversion base and became involved with newbuildings. In that time the company has established a commendable reputation in the product tanker market and currently, (late-2004), has a remarkable order book encompassing more than 100 vessels of this type, mainly split between circa 46,000dwt and 35,000dwt/37,000dwt standard designs.
BP's 12-ship contract, placed in 2002, favoured vessels of the larger size, and is of particular interest because of the owner's decision to modify the last three deliveries of the series by incorporating the requirements of Class 1A ice strengthening, and fitting a higher powered main engine - additional features reflecting British Petroleum's anticipation of increased
Baltic trading in the wake of an extension of Russian oil exports in the near future.

An earlier version of this standard design (Borag) was presented in Significant Ships of 2003, with the major differences between that vessel and British Liberty being the fitting by BP of a forecastle to the basic single-deck configuration, and a requirement to have only 12 cargo tanks in place of Borag's 20. Notably, these are specified for the carriage of IMO Type III chemicals instead of the latter's suitability for Type II products. Two slop tanks are also provided at the aft end of the cargo space.

HMD has constructed the design with scantlings consistent with the loading of cargoes of specific gravity 1.025. The upper deck is cambered, and the double-hull features top and bottom wing tanks joined with side and bottom tanks. The ensuing space is
 28
 divided at the centreline by a duct keel to form six pairs of 'L-shaped' tanks designated for water ballast purposes.

The cargo space subdivision into 12 tanks is made by means of a series of transverse bulkheads, and a centreline structure, all of corrugated construction built up on stools, and, with all other stiffening outside of the tanks, internal surfaces are plain and protected with an International epoxy coating compatible with the cargoes carried and providing for easy maintenance.
Pipes and fittings are fabricated from high quality
SUS316L stainless steel, with AISI grade 316L material used in the manufacture of the 12 x 600m°/h Framo hydraulically driven submerged cargo pumps, and 2 x 300m°/h similar pumps which serve the slop tanks.

The superstructure aft stands six tiers high, including wheelhouse, and accommodates a complement of 28, plus six Suez/repair crew who occupy a dormitory in the lower level. The machinery casing is separated from the accommodation block to reduce noise and vibration, but the two ate linked by a gangway leading to the free-fall lifeboat launching over the stern. Access to the forecastle from aft is by means of a longitudinal gangway.

The main engine is a six-cylinder unit from the MAN
B&W S5OMC-C range, built by Hyundai Heavy
Industries and developing 9480kW at 127rev/min. This produces a service speed of 15.20knots when operating at 90% MCR. As noted above, the last three vessels of this BP series will be fitted with a 7-cylinder version of this engine rated at 11,060kW. Electrical power is supplied by three 740kW Hyundai diesel-alternator sets (driven by Hyundai's new HiMSEN21/32 engines), and steam is generated in a 20,000kg/h oil-fired boiler and a 900kg/h exhaust-gas economiser.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Length, oa.. F
Length, bp.. 174,00
Breadth, MOUIdE” 0.0... ceceeceseeeeseeteseeseseseeneneeeneneee 32.20m

Depth, moulded, to upper deck....
Width of double skin
 side .... 2.00m
 bottom
Draught
 design... .
 scantling -12.20m
Gross... ..29,335gt
Displacement . .56,242tonnes
LIQNtWEIGNK 0... eee eee eects eeeeeeeeeeteteneneteeeee 9439tonnes
Deadweight
 design.... i
 scantling. 46,800dwt
Block COefICIONE eee cteeseseseeeteseseseeeseseseeeenenes 0.801
Speed, service at 90% MCR... ..15.20knots

Cargo capacity
VQUID VOIUME oe .eececceeeeececcecscescseseeecscecsteseseserenees! 53,880m*
Bunkers heavy oil.. diesel oil..
Water ballast.
Fuel consumption
 main engine only .. ..36.50tonnes/day auxiliaries .... 2.40tonnes/day
Classification .... .Lloyd's Register of Shipping
 +100A1, Double Hull
Oil and Chemical Tanker, Ship Type 3 in Association with a List of Defined Cargoes, ESP.
Descriptive note: ShipRight (SCM), ETA
Percentage of high-tensile steel

USEC IN CONSHFUCTION .... cece eeteseseesneeee approx 28%
Main engine
De@SIQN ooo. eeceeeeteteteee MAN B&W
Model ssisssussess -

Type of fuel used
Output
Propeller
Material
Designer/manufacturer .

HMRI/Hyundai
Heavy Industries
Number
 ... Hyundai Heavy Industries
HIMSEN/H21/32

Engine make/type..

Type of fuel used
Output...
Alternator make/type..
 x 780kW/720rev/min ..Hyundai Heavy Industries/ HFC6-506-10D

OULU occ eceeeeeteneneeneerees 3 x 740kW/720rev/min
Exhaust gas scrubbing equipment
Manufacturer...
Boiler
Number .
Type...
Make . ..KangRim
Output ...
Mooring equipment
NUMDEP ooo. ce eeeeeteeeeeeeeeeees 2 x mooring winch/windlass 4 x mooring winch
Make .. Hochang-Pusnes
Type... Hydraulic
Lifesaving equipment
Number/type ... ..1 x 34-person free-fall lifeboat

Fassmer
Cargo tanks
 12 cargo tanks; 2 slop tanks
IMO III; pollution category B, C, D sees International pure epoxy pipes and fittings SUS 317L

Grades of cargo..
Coated tanks...
Stainless steel ..
Cargo pumps
Number...
Type .......
Stainless steel ..
 fee 12 plus 2 slop tanks john hydraulic submerged ceveeeeeeseseeeesnereseeeeens AISI 316L

Capacity «12 x 600m*/h; 2 x 300m°/h
Cargo/ballast control systems

Make... Praxis

Type... ..electric signal and control
Complement

Officers...

Bridge control system
Make...
Type.
One-man operation.

Fire detection system
Make .. ...Consilium
 nalogue addressable

Type.
Fire extinguishing system

EMQINCLOOM. .....ssesessesessesessesseseesesessesessesneseseeeeseeeaeaens CO, Radars

Number..

Make... -Furuno

Models x FAR-2835SW

S-band: 1 x FAR-2825W X-band

Integrated bridge SYStOM oo... cece cceeeesteteteeseseseetetseesesees No
Waste disposal system

Incinerator

Waste compactor
Make
Model...

Sewage plant
Make.
Model
 “DVZ- SKA-20
Contract date ... 6 December 2002
Launch/float-out date .16 September 2004
Delivery date oo... ee reece eeseseeeeteneees November 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
CAP DOUKATO: first product of
Warnemunde/Wismar merger

Shipbuilder: ......Aker Ostsee (Aker Yards ASA), 
Germany
Vessel’S NAME? ......ceececeeseeteteeees Cap Doukato
Hull number: ............
Owner/operator:. .... Hartmann Schiffahrts

GmbH & Co KG, Germany/Hamburg-Stid, Germany

De@SIQNEr woe. Aker Ostsee, Germany
Model test establishment Used: ........0.c eee -
Ll <6 Liberia
Total number of sister
 ships already completed: .........ccccceeseeees Nil
Total number of sister
 ships still On Order: oo... cece eects 11 plus
 (for various owners)

EGOTIATIONS begun some two yeats ago have
 resulted in two major Scandinavian industrial groups, Aker RGI and Kvaerner ASA, effecting a merger which has brought their respective shipbuilding interests together under the name Aker Yards AS.
Based in Oslo, the new company is now regarded as the largest shipbuilding group in Europe, and the fifth worldwide, with sites in Norway, Finland, Germany, Romania, and Brazil, as well as interests in North
America. Following that merger, it became evident that combining the activities of two neighbouring German group-companies, Aker MTW Werft (in Wismar) and
Kvaerner Warnow Werft (in Rostock-Warnemiinde), would be advantageous, bringing two of the most modern yards in Europe, together with an integrated production programme and a common design philosophy. Consequently, they are today operating under the trade-mark name of Aker Ostsee.

Cap Doukato is the first product of that merger and the lead ship of a new seties of container ships identified as the Baltic CS 2500 - a geared version, and the gearless Baltic CS 2700, with orders booked for the two types already totalling around 30. The new series has evolved from two established products of the partners: Warnemtinde's Warnow CV 2500 and the
MTW 2500, a similar design developed at Wismar from the Bremer Vulkan BV 2500 series. A feature of the amalgamation has been the division of construction work between the two yards, and currently the technique adopted is to build the aft end of a vessel (up to midships) in the building dock at Wismar, and the fore end (and superstructures) at nearby Warnemiinde.
These are then transported to Wismar to be joined to the neat-completed aft end.

The Baltic CS 2500 is essentially a combination of the hull form of the MTW 2500 with the superstructure of the CV 2500, with the addition of a completely new engineroom layout developed to suit the changes in machinery requirements since the original designs were introduced. Particularly this involves the fitting of the
 30
 larger MAN B&W 7L70MC-C main engine of 21,770kW output at 108rev/min, and the provision of a separate compartment housing four diesel-driven alternator sets with a combined output of 4895kW, but designed to accept machines of up to circa 7000kW output to suit the needs of a higher reefer-container intake. Steam requirements are met from an Aalborg oil-fired/exhaust-gas composite boiler.

Cap Doukato is a single-deck vessel with an extended forecastle, through which access to the fore patt of No 1 hold is made, and a poop supporting a slim seven-tier deckhouse. The hull is of double-skin format, divided into five cargo holds closed by 10 MacGregor ‘lift-away' pontoon hatch covers of a partial box-girder construction, a system which offers advantages of construction, maintenance, operation, and use of steel materials. Ventilation apertures are arranged in the sides of the covers which have stack loadings of 55/75tonnes (TEU/FEU) at hatches 1 and 2, with 70/100tonnes applying on the remainder. The upper deck above the engineroom can sustain 60/90tonnes (TEU/FEU).

Holds 1 and 2 ate equipped for the carriage of dangerous cargoes, and connections are provided for 300 reefer containers on deck and 100 in the holds. Cell guides in the holds ate suitable for 40ft containers, and 45ft units can be loaded on the covers above one tier of
TEU/FEU. Handling of cargo on the CS-2500 version of this Baltic design is by means of three MacGregor
GL2, centreline-mounted, electric-hydraulic deck cranes of 45tonne/25m rating. The CS-2700 variant is gearless and with the addition of a 14m hull section, TEU capacity is increased to 2732, against 2478 for its consott.

A feature of these Aker Ostsee designs is their adoption of the ISPS safety code and the inclusion in the specification of measures to restrict access to defined sensitive areas of the ship. Security lighting around the ships and the provision of alarms has also been considered. Germanischer Lloyd environmental and ballast-water management requirements are also complied with.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, 0a...
Length, bp..
Breadth, moulded ....
Depth, moulded, to upper deck...
Draught design scantling ...

Deadweight design scantling

Speed, service, at 90% MCR, 15% sea margin...

Bunkers
NE AVY FUCL. cece es eeesestesesreseseeseeresesreeeseeseeenees
 diesel oil...
Water ballast.
Classification .
 .-9300m* ...Germanischer Lloyd + 100 A5, -O, BWM-S, BWM-F, SOLAS II-2, Reg: 19, Container Ship with ‘Environmental Passport’, + MC E, AUT
Heel Control SYStOM ....c.ececeeeceeseesseeeesssesesecssscesscseseeaees Hoppe
Main engine
Design ..
Model...
Manufacturer

Type of fuel used
Output...
Propeller
Type
Manufacturer
Number.

Speed... ccc

Special adaptations Schneekluth-type wake

Diesel-driven alternators
 ..3 x MAN B&W Holeby 7L21/31 1 x MAN B&W Holeby 5L21/31

Engine make/type...

Type of fuel used
Alternator make/type..
Output (total)

Boiler
Number/type....
Make ..
 .MAN B&W Holeby ..4895kW/900rev/min
 s: 2.3tonnes/h

Output... E 2. oil fired: 1.8tonnes/h

Cargo cranes

Number/type. ...3 X 45tonne/25m

Type... ...Electro-hydraulic

Make .. MacGregor (Haggltind)
Mooring equipment

NUMDET vsccscessseccceeeeeeeeeetseeeees 2 x mooring winch windlass
 5 x mooring winch

MaKe aoe ccc eccceseeeeseseseeeeseeesessseceessuecsesteecansceesteeees Hatlapa
Hatch covers

Design MacGregor

Type... ..Lift-away pontoons
Containers

Lengths -20ft; 40ft; 45ft
 in holds

Total TEU capacity on deck ..........

IN NOIAS oo... eceeeeeceseeseeeeeeeeeeeseeneeseeneneees homogeneously loaded to 14tonnes
Reefer plugs
Tiers/rows (maximum) on deck
 in holds....
Complement (total).
Bow thruster
Number..
Manufacturer.

Bridge control system ...
Fire extinguishing systems
Contract date ..
Launch/float-ou
Delivery date
 12 August 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004 i a ay es
THEE RHEE EEE Se
 ris Px bc Be xin inn Pala lala bain
 =—

CARIBBEAN PRINCESS: a larger 'Grand
Class' cruise liner

Shipbuilder: .Fincantieri CNI (Monfalcone Yard), Italy
Caribbean Princess

Hull number: ......
Owner/operator: .
 ...Princess Cruise Lines, USA
Fincantieri CNI, Italy
Model test establishments used:.............. Vienna

Model Basin, Austria/ MARIN, The Netherlands

FAQ! .eeeeeeeeceeceeeseectenseeereteesenesetseneseeees Bermuda
Total number of sister
 ships already completed:..........cceeeceneenees 3
Total number of sister

Ships Still ON OFM: oo. cccececeseesesseeseeteeeersees 3

RDERED by P&O Princess Cruises, one of the
 leading companies in the eleven-strong Carnival
Corporation cruising empire, Caribbean Princess is a development of her owner's 'Grand Class' series introduced in 1998 with Grand Princess (Significant Ships of 1998 ), a vessel hailed on completion as the world's largest cruise liner. The series continued with sisters
Golden and Star Princess, and although physically of similar dimensions to those lead ships, this latest addition to the class ranks as a larger vessel, since design tevisions and innovative production technologies have enabled an additional passenger deck to be added with a gain of 255 cabins and an increase in passenger complement of about 20%, to a total of 3598.

A consequent increase in gross tonnage to 112,894et not only gives Caribbean Princess a prestigious move up the ladder of the largest cruise liners in service, but marks it as the largest cruise liner yet built by
Fincantieri. Another significant change from Grand
Princess is the use of 1100tonnes of light alloy in the construction of the upper two tiers of the 17-deck high hull: the consequent saving in weight not only effecting a proportionate reduction in draught which is advantageous on many of the vessel's cruising itineraries, but also improving stability and comfort by lowering the centre of gravity.

These modifications have brought about only minor changes to the outboard profile of the new 'Grand
Class' vessels. Once again, the discotheque is spectactularly suspended at a height of 40m above the sea at the stern. Within the vessel, the usual array of theatres, swimming pools and boutiques ate provided, along with a fitness centre, library and casino, all fashioned in line with trade-mark Carnival/Princess standards.

The machinery installation also shows some changes from that fitted to the earlier 'Grand Class' vessels, with the diesel-electric propulsion and hotel system powered, as before, by six Wartsila Sulzer diesel engines, but now sized as follows: 4 x 16ZAV40S units arranged in one machinery room, and 2 x 12ZAV40S type in a second compartment. These each develop 11,520kW and 8640kW respectively and are connected to four Siemens $51400M58-14SE+WkK, and two S5E1400M50- 14SE+WK, alternators by flexible couplings.
 32

The larger units produce 14,000kW and the smaller 10,500kW, with part of the supply fed to two 19,000kW propulsion motors from the same supplier, positioned in a compattment arranged between the two enginerooms. The shaft lines from these pass through the aft engineroom to drive twin FP propellers for a service speed of 22.48knots at 86% MCR. The shipbuilder's military division supplied six thrusters: three at the bow of 2200kW each, and three aft of 1750kW.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, 0a....
Length, bp....
Breadth, MOULAGS saniesencds conanen ine nersonenen sneonsasieasonpnorers sare 36.00m
Depth, moulded
 to upper deck to bulkhead deck..
Draught
 design .... scantling .

Deadweight
COSIQN sassisasescarnosenessars ds eestsrsanans cansns ind venvack omgereed 6865dwt scantling 10,049dwt
 approx 0.70 +. 22.48kn0ts

Block coefficient ..
Speed service (86% MCR)
Bunkers heavy oil.. diesel oil..
Water ballast. grey water...
Fuel consumption
Classification
 -Registro Italiano Navale and
Lloyd's Register

Percentage of high-tensile

SEE! USE if COMSHUCTION) vconeress sea noreonssarons course onvsions sda ed 40%
Percentage of aluminium

USE IN, SUPEKSHUCTULE: carcass cassassssessssassavessescessesaasscesanssased 6%
Heel control equipment ........... eee axial flow pumps in ship
 automation system
Roll stabilisation equipment

TYPO ceeeecceeeceeetetseeeeeeetseseseeteeetereeeeeee fins without flaps
NAKG sess css ccs cescess an averse arsiariees Fincantieri Military Division
Diesel-electric system
Main engines
Design... Wartsila Sulzer
NUMDED 0. eee ceeeeeseereeeseseescsescerenerseeeeeseeeeneees 6
 4x Sulzer 16ZAV40S 2 x Sulzer 12ZAV40S ..Wartsila Italia SpA 4 x 11,520kW/2 x 8640kW

Models...

Manufacturer....
Output of each engine...
Alternators
Design/manufacturer.......ccccceccceceeeeseteteesees Siemens
Number..
 ..4 X S51400M58-14SE+WK
 2 x S5E1400M50-14SE+WK

Output .......... 4 x 14,000kW/2 x 10,500kW/514rev/min
Propulsion motors

Design/manufacturer..

Model ....

Number..

Siemens

OUDUt Lecce 2 x 19,000kW/143rev.min
Propellers
Material assesses csesarssess es ceoren ns cnsannnenssansanaseenaced Cunial .Lips 12 wO .5600mm
SPCC Gas sss sas cass ces ceneassoavees vas casness vosscnserirsassseessnens 150rev/min
Boilers
Number
Type..
Make.
Ouput...
Lifesaving equipment
Number/type... .... 18 x 150-person lifeboats;
 6 x 110/150-person tender/lifeboats; 2 x rescue boats; 36 x 35-person liferafts; 36 x liferafts
Mak @sccsissessscivssatsorsssesssonarssaessass Fassmer/Norsafe/Viking
Complement
Officers.
Crew..
Spare.
Single/other rooms
Passengers

Number of cabins..
Percentage outboard.
Bow thrusters

Output...
Bridge control system
Make..

Type ..
One man operation
 .SAM Electronics
Atlas Nacos 65-4 ..Only to qualify for

NAV (LR) notation
Fire detection system

Make . -Consilium

Type... .NS/AC1
Fire extinguishing system

Supplier. ..Marioff
 ..watermist

Radars
Number.
Make.. SAM Electronics
MOdEIS 00 ..ececccceseeeeneeeeeseeeeeeceteeeersereeenee Series 1029

Integrated bridge system

SAM Electronics 330
Waste disposal plant

Incinerator

MKC... cece cseseseteseststeteeeeesesees Deerberg Systems

LN, (oe [Ee 1600kW
Waste compactor

Make.... .Deerberg Systems

Model... EK 1100-600
Waste shredder/crusher

Make.... Deerberg Systems

Model.. Mercedor glass crusher
Sewage plant

Make.... .Deerberg Systems

Model .. ST70X and ST40
Contract date. ..27 July 1999
Launch/float-out date... ccceccsceneeeeeteneneereee July 2003

Delivery date...... ..20 March 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
CHIN SHAN: new-generation ‘Dunkirk-

Max' bulker

Shipbuilder:......China Shipbuilding Corporation, (CSBC), Taiwan

VeSSEl'S NAME! oo. cecceceeeteteteeteeeeeteees Chin Shan
Hull NUMDES: oo... cece eee eeeeteeetteeeneeees 821
Owner/operator: . ...Brighton Shipping Inc
Designer: ......... China Shipbuilding Corporation, (CSBC), Taiwan ol [-\¢ EEE ...Panama
Total number of sister ships already iN SErVICE! oo... ceeecceceeceteeseteteeretsteres 1
Total number of sister ships
Stil] OM OFOP: oc cccceceteetetseeteeteeteeteneeseetenes 1

NEW 'max' design was presented in 'Significant

Ships of 2001', named 'Dunkirk-Max' by builder
CSBC; it was marketed as the largest ship, in terms of deadweight and cubic capacity, to meet the specific limitations of the de Gaulle Lock in the port of
Dunkirk, France. The prototype vessel described in that review (China Steel Excellence) was a single-hull bulk cattier of 175,800tonnes maximum deadweight/ 195,500m> capacity; now, CSBC has modified the design to introduce a double-hull derivative complying with IMO requirements. The extra structure involved offers only minimal reductions to those original characteristics, which, it is claimed, are still superior to those of similar available designs.

CSBC has adopted a simplistic approach to incorporating a 'double-hull' into its existing design, by introducing an inner-skin between the top and bottom wing tanks and utilising the enclosed spaces as voids, strengthened by horizontal stringers which, nevertheless, retain access for maintenance purposes. A central duct keel divides the double bottom into P&S spaces, joined with their adjacent bottom wing tank to form common tanks and supplementing the top wing tanks and peaks as the vessel's main ballast compartments. Additionally, No 6 hold serves as a deeptank for use on heavy weather ballast voyages, whilst Nos 2, 4, and 8 holds may be partially filled to reduce air draught at Dunkirk East port. The ballast system has been designed to comply with environmental restrictions on the exchange of water ballast at sea.

All nine holds are fitted with hydraulically operated, rack-and-pinion driven, side-rolling hatch covers with the dimensions of all but the first and last - measuring

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
 16.38m long x 21.60m wide - demonstrating the provision made for easy cargo handling. In common with most bulk carrier designs, this CSBC 'Dunkitk-
Max' product is arranged for loading ore in alternate holds: Nos 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 compartments being reinforced to carry this cargo with the remaining spaces empty.
Around 50% of steel used in the construction is high tensile, and 3D fine-mesh FEM models were used to carry out a fatigue strength assessment based on a 25- year life.

Chin Shan is fitted with a MAN B&W 6S70MC main engine manufactured by Hitachi Zosen, and developing 15,000kW MCR when running at 81rev/min, and 12,750kW at 76.7rev/min NCR, to give a service speed of 14.80knots, allowing a 15% sea margin. The engine power has been derated to give a lower fuel oil consumption. Marpol NOx emission control requirements for both the main engine and incinerator have been complied with. Electtical power is derived from three MAN B&W/Hyundai 720kW alternators, and steam requirements are served from a watertube 2500kg/h boiler.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, 0a....
Length, bp....
Breadth, moulded ..
Depth, moulded ..
 24.10m

Gross .91,166gt
Deadweight design..... ... 159,887dwt scantling..... .175,569dwt
Draught
 design i scantling . 17.78m
Speed, service at 85% MCR, 15% sea margin....14.80knots

Cargo capacity
GAIN occ cece eeeeeee ese eseeeeeseeeeeesesessseseeeatenesees
Bunkers heavy oil.. diesel oil.
Water ballast
Fuel consumption
MAIN ENGINE ONY ......ccceeeceesecees eters 50.90tonnes/day
Classification........ American Bureau of Shipping +A1 E Bulk
Carrier, Strengthened for Heavy Cargoes, Nos 2, 4, 6 and 8 Holds may be Empty, ESP, SH, SHCM, HCS, +AMS, +ACCU, UWILD
Percentage of high-tensile
 steel used iN CONSTFUCTION ...... cece approx 50%
Main engine
Design .... . MAN B&W

Model 6S70MC

Manufacturer .. Hitachi-Zosen

Number... 1

Output .15,000kW/81rev/min MCR
Propeller

Material ...Nickel-aluminium-bronze

STX-MAN B&W/6L23/30H -Hyundai/HFC6 506-14K 3 x 720kW

Engine make/type
Alternator make/type.
 .. Vertical water tube
 .KangRim/MA04P01
 2500kg/h
Mooring equipment

NUMDED oo. eceececceeteeeeeeeeeeeee 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 6 x mooring winch

Rolls-Royce
 .Electric-hydraulic

Fire extinguishing system
Engineroom
 1 x JMA-9833-SA 1 x JMA-9823-7XA

Models.

Satellite navigation system

Model...
Waste disposal plant
Incinerator

Sewage plant
 .. September 2004 ...November 2004

Launch/float-out date ..
Delivery date
 35 sT
CLIPPER HARVE?

CLIPPER HARVEST: Handy-sized
 with double-/single-hull mix

Shipbuilder: ........0.. The Hakodate Dock Co Lid, Japan

Vessel's name:... ..Clipper Harvest

HUI] NUMDET: oo. eee etter eee eereeeeereeies 795

Owner/operator:. ....Colas Harvest Ltd
 /Clipper Group, Bahamas

Designer: 0... The Hakodate Dock Co Ltd, 
Japan

FLAG? ceeceecescceecesceeeseeseseeseesessseteteeeasines Bahamas
Total number of sister
 ships already completed: .........cccccees 20
Total number of sister

Ships Still ON OFder: wo. cece teeter 1

ITH a history dating back to the closing years of
 the 19th century, Hakodate Dock can claim an existence longer than many of its giant competitors, and is proud of its position as the only shipbuilding and heavy industrial manufacturer on the northern
Japanese island of Hokkaido. Over recent times, its not inconsiderable shipbuilding output has been mainly directed towards building a range of bulk carriers designed to carry around 32,000dwt, fitting neatly into the niche between the so-called Handy- and
Handymax-sized vessels: a class which Hakodate describe as ‘intermediate’.

A particular feature of this output has been the suitability of many of these vessels for operating in the log trade, for which purpose an outfit of tall uprights is atranged along the hull side to accommodate deck loading, plus the necessary lashings and fastenings provided for securing this vulnerable cargo. Ships for this trade are usually equipped with cargo handling gear, and for Clipper Harvest this consists of four 30tonne swl slim-line electric-hydraulic cranes, fitted between hatches 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, and 4/5 at the centreline. All are on tall pedestals to suit high deck cargoes.

What is unusual about this Hakodate design is a mix of single- and double-skin construction within its single deck layout. Five cargo holds are provided, with Nos 1 and 5 built in accordance with traditional bulk carrier format with single-skin, and top and bottom, wing tanks. Nos 2, 3, and 4 holds, however, have double-skins without bottom wing tanks, but retaining the topside wings. Cargo handling is facilitated by hatches 2, 3, 4, and 5 offering clear openings of 20.0m long x 19.60m wide, and No 1 reduced in dimension because of the hull's shape forward, and by the extent of the forecastle.

All the hatches are closed by MacGregor-Kayaba folding-pait type covers. Clipper Harvest operates at a shallower load draught than most vessels of similar load

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
 capacity, and gains some advantage over them with regard to the choice it gives of loading/discharging ports. It is also claimed that the Hakodate design can maintain a sufficiently stable condition whilst loading a full cargo of logs, without requiring water ballast. An inclusion in the ship specification is a water ingress alarm system covering the cargo holds, fore peak tank and bosun's storeroom.

Although not as popular a design-choice for slow- speed main engines as the Sulzer or MAN B&W marques, the Mitsubishi UE range continues to provide a significant alternative to the market leaders on account of its high performance and treliablity. For C/pper
Harvest, the selection fell on a 6UEC52LA unit manufactured by a well-established Mitsubishi licensee, Akasaka Diesels Ltd. This engine delivers a MCR of 6620kW at 130rev/min and is directly coupled to a FP ptopeller. Electrical requirements are served from three
Yanmar/Taiyo 400kW diesel-driven alternator sets, and an auxiliary composite boiler — produces 1000kg¢/h/800kg/h respectively from the oil and exhaust-gas sides.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa...
Length, bp...
Breadth, moulded ..
Depth, moulded, to upper deck .
Width of double skin side (Nos 2/3/4 hatches) .... bottom (Nos 1/5 hatches)..
Draught design... scantling
Gross
Deadweight design, .. scantling.
Speed, service, 85% MCR;
Cargo capacity bale .... grain...
Bunkers heavy oil. diesel oil.
Water ballast
Fuel consumption main engine only . auxiliaries ...
Classification...
 15% sea margin.......
 “102.70m? "11,338"
 ...23.70tonnes/day ....1.20tonnes/day .. American Bureau of Shipping +A1 (E), 
Bulk Carrier, SHR, ESP, +AMS

Percentage of high-tensile steel USEC IN CONSTFUCTION oo... ccc tee teeeeneee 38%
Main engine
Design
Model .

Manufacturer .. Akasaka Diesels Ltd
Number 1
Tye OF TU csscsesscrsass ovvoornsassnsenas tonensness eoeneetontasnesteensenes HFO
 .6620kW/130rev/min

Material 0.0... KAIBC3 (nickel-aluminium-bronze)
Designer/manufacturer ........ Nakashima Propeller Co Ltd
Number val
Pitch ..... xed
Diameter . .5000mm
Speed .130rev/min
Diesel-driven alternators
Number...

Engine make/type..

Type of fuel.....

Output/speed. 3 x 455kW/900rev/min

Alternator make. Taiyo Electric

OUtPUL/SPEOd oo... ccc eeeeee 3 x 400kW/900rev/min
Auxiliary boilers

Type. .. Vertical, composite
Make ...Osaka Boiler
QUIPUL.....0 eee canenmnsa tea cd sssaamenas sa s¥3 memwamen of oil burning:
 1000kg/h; exhaust gas 800kg/h

Number
 ..Mitsubishi
 ..Electro-hydraulic
 .4 x 30tonne/24m radius
Mooring equipment

Number...
 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 2 x mooring winch
Mitsubishi -Electric-hydraulic

Hatch covers
Design/manufacturer
Type

Complement

Officers.
 ....MacGregor-Kayaba
Folding pairs

Fire detection system
Make....
Type..

Fire extinguishing system
Cargo holds/EngGinerOOM ........ccccceesesetetstseeeeterenee CO, 
Make.... ..Japan Radio Co
Models. .. JMA-9832SA, JMA-9822-6XA
Waste disposal plant
Incinerator
Make .Sunflame Co
Model ..OSV-360SAI

Contract date...
Launch/float-out date..
Delivery date
 ..4 April 2002 .22 October 2003 ...9 January 2004
 37
CMA CGM HUGO: expanding the 8000-plus TEU container carrier class

Shipbuilder:............... Hyundai Heavy Industries
Co Ltd, Korea

Vessel's name: ..... CMA CGM Hugo

Hull number: ..... 1532

Owner/operator:..... cece eee Conti Reederei, 
Germany/CMA CGM SA, 
France

Designer... Hyundai Heavy Industries

Co Ltd, Korea

Model test establishment used.............. Hyundai

Maritime Research Institute, 
Korea

FAQ: wssccssscsserenacerseorserecsenssasenitiaes Marshall Islands
Total number of sister
 ships already completed)... Nil

Total number of sister ships still on order: ..

TGNIFICANT Ships continues to mark the
 stretching of capacity limits of large container carriers by including in this 2004 review, Hyundai's new class of 8200TEU liners. A capability to load to around this total has become a popular choice for owners and opetators, and as 2004 began, some 80 ships of this size were on order worldwide (Hyundai's order book now also includes some 8600TEU vessels), with even larger 9200 /9600TEU examples under construction here and at other Korean yards.

Hyundai container ship designs are noted for their adoption of a wide beam, which ensures better stability when working cargo, and for a hull form aimed at producing superior propulsion efficiency at the varying draughts which result from loading schemes. It is also a philosophy in agreement with the consideration that vessels of these larger sizes, when built to conventional dimensions, are reaching a length-limit beyond which hull stiffness would be reduced.

Arguably, the main difference between the designs on offer from the shipbuilders participating in this market lies in the disposition of cargo holds, with CMA CGM
Hugo presenting a nine-hold layout, with seven compartments, dimensioned to suit 30 x 20ft bays, arranged forward of the machinery space, and two in the more restricted space aft, suitable for eight x 20ft bays. Above the machinery is a slender, nine-tier superstructure housing a normal complement of 33 petsons, plus a 6-man Suez crew.

CMA CGM Hugo is double-hulled with the side and bottom tanks assigned for carrying fuel and water ballast, and two of the latter also used as heeling tanks, working with a 1000m°/h pump. The arrangement is also based on a 'gitderless' construction system which, it is claimed, allows a maximum container stowage arrangement in the holds: in this case 15 rows, each nine tiers high. Deck/hatch cover stowage is seven tiers high x 17 rows, producing a total of 3835 units below decks

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
 and 4403 above, with electrical sockets arranged for 700 refrigerated containers. Holds 1 to 4, and numbers 8 and 9 are fitted with mechanical ventilation providing two air changes/hour, making them suitable for the carriage of dangerous cargoes of SOLAS classes 1.4 to 9.

MacGregor hatch covets ate of the pontoon type with partial box construction. Each is made up of three panels with a maximum weight restricted to 41tonnes to suit handling by dockside cranes. The vessel is designed to accept 20ft, 40ft, and 45ft containers, with 48ft size loaded on hatch covers 8F and 9F. The holds ate equipped with cell guides suitable for 40ft units but which can accommodate seven tiers of TEU.
Athwartship lashing bridges are provided for the larger- sized boxes, and are arranged with the necessary fittings to allow containers stowed on hatch covers and upper deck stools to be conveniently lashed and secured up to four, five, six, or seven tiers high.

A Hyundai-MAN B&W 12K98MC Mk 6 main engine is fitted, developing 68,640kW MCR at 94tev/min. At 90% of this rating, service speed is 25.60knots.
Electrical requirements are served by five Hyundai-built diesel-alternator sets. Two of these produce 2800kW, and the other three 2200kW each, the high output partly reflecting the large number (700 on this ship) of reefer boxes carried today. A bow thruster of 2500kW, supplied by a Rolls-Royce affiliate, is fitted, and interesting features are the development of an optimum-section rudder profile and the raked-tip design of the propeller, aimed at reducing cavitation.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa.. we

Depth, 
Width of double skin side .... bottom

Draught design scantling

Gross

Deadweight design ... scantling

Speed, service, 90% MCR.

Bunkers heavy oil... diesel oil

Water ballast...

Fuel consumption, main engine only... 248, 
Classification 0.0... Germanischer Lloyd, +100, A5, IW, 
Containership, SOLAS II-2, Reg 19, +MC, AUT

Percentage of high-tensile
 -.83,820dwt
 ..101,660dwt ...25.60knots
 ..12,500m*
 steel USed iN CONStFUCTION 0.0... eee eee eeeeeee approx 58%
Heel control equipment............. 1000m*/h anti-heeling pump
Main engine

Design .. . .MAN B&W
Model.... K98MC Mk 6

Hyundai Heavy Industries 1

Type of fuel........ HFO
Output, MCR ....68,640kW/94rev/min
Propeller
Material Nickel-aluminium-bronze
Designer/manufacturer, .. Hyundai
NUIMDED eee eceeeeeeeeceseseecseseeeeseseeesscessesscasseseseeessssenessesenenenes 1
Pitch .... Fixed
Diameter . 100mm
 b
Engine mal dl M B&W/9L27/38 3 x Hyundai-MAN B&W/7L27/38
Type of fuel HFO

Alternator make/type 2 x Hyundai/HSJ7-807-10P 3 x Hyundai/HSJ7-803-10P
OUutpUt/SPOOM oo. cee eects 2 x 2800kW/720rev/min
 3 x 2200kW/720rev/min

Mooring equipment

NUMDET oes eeee eee eeeeeeeee 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 10 x mooring winch

Make... ....Brohl

Type .... ... Electric
Hatch covers

Design .MacGregor

Manufacturer ......0.cccceceseceeeeeetessesesessiesessssereees Hyundai

Lift-off pontoons
Containers

Cell guides
Total TEU capacity
 on deck...
 in holds. 3835
Reefer plugs . ..100
Tiers/rows (maximu
 on deck ... 7/7
 in holds... .

Hold refrigeration..
Ballast control system
Make...

Pleiger Far East

Type.... ..Electro-hydraulic, CRT display
Complement

OPICELS eee cece ceseseseseseseeseseseenessssssesenassesetenerseneneneeee® 16

Crew.... A7

Suez/rep «8

Bow thruster

Number..
Output...
Bridge control system
Make...
Type....
One man operation .
Fire detection system
Make ...
Type....
Fire extinguishing system
Tankdeck/engineroom.

Saracom-Thorn 2000 addressable

High-pressure CO, 
NK Co Ltd
Radars
NUPTIBGP....ccnencserseesssnssennsonnasnaias ssssanksta sot seat araaEeaneacesnaeesed 3
Types 2x X-band; 1 x S-band
Malk@ s cesersrssassssas son eranesuinvn eosouses sesrcon ens ue SAM Electronics
Models 6; 1 x 1006 (bow radar)
Waste disposal plant
Incinerator
Make.... KangRim
Model... KG1-10DSA
Sewage plant
Make ooo. cece
Model

Contract date..
Launch/float-out date
Delivery date
COLOR FANTASY: 'cruise ship with car
 decks’

Shipbuilder: oo... ee Aker Finnyards - formerly Kvaerner Masa-Yards (Turku yard), Finland
 .... Color Fantasy
Hull number: . .. 1351
Owner/operator: .. ...Color Line AS, Norway
Designer: .....Kvaerner Masa-Yards Inc, Finland/ Color Line AS, Norway

Model test establishment used:.............. MARIN, The Netherlands

Vessel's name:.

Total number of sister
 ships already completed)... ccc Nil
Total number of sister ships still ON Order: wo. es 1 option

Co EANTASY tepresents a bold development in her owner's tourist strategy aimed at attracting more German visitors to Norway, particularly brought in through a revitalised Oslo, Whilst a conventional ferry could, no doubt, have been successfully introduced on to the Kiel/Oslo route, Color Line decided that what was needed to emphasise its operation above others, was a new vessel which offered passengers similar onboard attractions to those available on a cruise ship, and for these to be presented as an integral part of the holiday experience.

However, Color Fantasy still has a conventional ferry role to play, and her design exhibits a substantial investment in freight transportation with 1030lane metres available for commercial traffic on the main deck, plus 240lane metres in the cellar hold. A hoistable deck offers extra space, (2500lane metres for cars), and above is another fixed level (deck 5) for cars only, the total capacity for which is quoted at 750. This latter space is partly convertible into an exhibition area.

In a relatively unusual arrangement, the vehicle decks do not extend over the ship's full breadth, and modular crew cabins, plus some service rooms, are arranged in the space each side. Access to the cargo area is through an external bow door, and bow and stern ramp/doors on to deck 3, with an internal ramp and a side-shell entry serving the garage space on deck 5. MacGregor has supplied the access package, hoistable deck (deck 4 - between decks 3 and 5), and a lifting platform for transporting semi-trailers to the cellar hold. This company has also provided eight passenger lifts, seven passenger/service, and four service lifts, together with the complete refrigeration system.

Particular attention has been paid to the requirements of the DNV Comfort 1 Class notation in the design of

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
 the accommodation, the focal point of which is the 120m long central internal promenade, which extends through three decks and is flanked by many of Color
Fantasy's tourist attractions, including shops and boutiques, and also at the higher levels, by the windows of otherwise inside cabins.

Elsewhere in the vessel are restaurants to suit all preferences, including the Oceanic, situated right aft and subjected to special investigations for noise and vibration problems. Of special appeal is a water park (Aqualand) in the form of a figure-of-eight running river, spa centre, casino, cinema, show lounge, discos and conference areas. A golf driving range and putting green are also included and, at the top of the ship, there is an observation lounge with all-round vision.

Color Fantasy's hull was developed using the shipyard's fluid dynamics software, and finalised after comptehensive model testing. It features the ‘underflow’ form, including semi-tunnel stern (the so- called wave-damping aft body) which was introduced some yeats ago. Propulsion power is derived from a straight diesel-mechanical system using two pairs of
Wartsila 8L46-B main engines, each developing 7800kW at 500rev/min MCR, and running at 90% of that output for a contractual service speed of 23knots.
Two  twin-input/single-output Renk reduction gearboxes are included in the drive to the Kamewa
Ulstein CP propellers, and each is also coupled to a 4800kW ABB alternator. Additional electrical supply comes from four Wartsila/ ABB 1950kW diesel-driven alternators. To assist manoeuvring in Kiel and Oslo harbours, Kamewa Ulstein has supplied three 2200kW bow thrusters and two 1000kW stern units, part of an extensive Rolls-Royce involvement with the ship.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa. ins
Length, bp.
Breadth, moulded
Depth, moulded to main deck... to upper deck.
Draught design scantling ..
Gross oe
Deadweight, design .
Speed, service, 90% MCR....
Classification ............. Det Nor:
ICE-1B (1A except for propeller blades 1B), RP, EO, MCDK, pwdk, NAUT-OC, F-M, COMF-V(1)
Pass & crew, CLEAN, TMON .2 pairs of heeling tanks ...Brown Brothers

Heel contro! equipment
Roll stabilisation equipment...
 (Rolls-Royce) fin stabilisers

Main engines
Design..
Model...

Type of fuel..
Output
Gearboxes

Propellers
Material .scsssssacssnssssevsarvtanssnsarssssaasectsistacnsestenseensennens Bronze
Designer/manufacturer..
Number

Main-engine driven alternators
Number .

Output/speed
Diesel-driven alternators

Engine make/type ..

OUTPUL/SPOO 0... eseccesesssetsnsetseccessesecsscesssescssnscessessteseeess -
Alternator make/type.. -ABB/-
Output/SPeed oes 4 x 1950kW/1000rev/min

Mooring equipment
Number of units ..

Rolls-Royce Rauma Brattvaag
Lifesaving equipment
Number/type .....6 x lifeboats; 2 x rescue boats, 6 x MES
Make... cececceeereeeeteee Umoe Schat-Harding (lifeboats)
Viking (escape chutes)

Vehicles
Number Of G@CKS ......cecccesceceseesesteseeseeee 3 plus 1 hoistable
Total lane length 0... ccc 1270m plus 2500m on hoistable platforms
TOU CAPS iia carat ces conagen ls easees chen beset enuucendenret ces Havent eee@s 750
Doors, ramps
Number/type....... eee 1x bow door; 1 x bow ramp; 1 x stern ramp; hoistable platforms; internal ramp; trailer lift
Designer... .
Complement
Passengers

Bow thrusters

Kamewa Ulstein (Rolls-Royce)
Se pyaetas a etees 3 .3 x 2200kW

Output...
Stern thrusters
Make..

Kamewa Ulstein (Rolls-Royce)

NUMDED oo. eeeecceeenseseseeeeeeseeesenenseseseenseseseseteessseeesscses

Output.... -2 x 1000kW
Contract date. 6 December 2002
Launch/float OUt-date oc secsessssssseseeneeeeese 30 April 2004

Delivery, Gate saiscis ivctwsssasdet vevsdsconaanstcasani wenand 3 December 2004
 4]
COPIAPO: Taiwan-built container liner

Shipbuilder:.. China Shipbuilding Corp (CSBC), Taiwan
Vessel'S NAME? cc ccccececeseeeseseeeseseseee Copiapo

Hull number: ..............
MS ‘Amazonia’
Schiffahrtsgesellschaft mbH & Co KG
 (Peter Déhle-KG), 
Germany/CSAV, Chile

Designer:........ China Shipbuilding Corp, Taiwan

Model test establishment used: . ...HSVA, 
Germany

FLAG! coeeccceeeetetetetstetsesesetstscstsesssenets Liberia
Total number of sister
 ships already completed: 0... Nil
Total number of sister

Ships still ON OFCOM: oo. cece eeeeeseeseseeeneees 5
 peer D6hle is just one of many German owners who specialise in building vessels, particularly container carriers, for charter to international liner companies. Copéapo is lead ship of a new design (of a size once regarded as ‘very large’ but now, perhaps, more akin to a ‘medium! rating) which is starting its life on charter to leading Chilean operator Compania Sud
Americana de Vapores SA (CSAV), whose services run worldwide from the South American state. Whilst the design has been developed from that of similar-sized vessels built previously by CSBC, its hull form is, nevertheless, the result of new comparative tests on two different models, run at the Hamburger Schiffbau
Versuchsanstalt (HSVA) establishment, Hamburg, and the structure has been designed to suit the latest Lloyd's
Register requirements.

Particular attention has been paid in those model tests to the design of the propeller, drawing on RINA conference recommendations relating to optimum speed and cavitation control. The weight of the propeller has been especially considered, and vibration performance is considered to be much improved, compared with earlier designs. The first three vessels of this new series have been fitted with Sulzer LORTA9GC-
B main engines manufactured by the HSD Engine Co (a combination of the former Hanjung, Samsung, and
Daewoo engine works) but later examples will switch to the newly introduced 'RT-flex' type, specifically a 10RT- flex96C-B unit.

The 10RTA96C-B engine develops 54,904kW (74,700bhp) at 100rev/min MCR, and when operating at 90% of that rating with a sea margin of 15%, gives a setvice speed of 25.92knots. Electrical requirements include supplying 500 refrigerated FEU and a 2000kW bow thruster.
 44

Copiapo is a single-deck vessel with forecastle and sunken mooring deck aft. The double-skin hull is arranged with seven holds, five of which are forward of the machinery room, which is positioned about three- quarters aft and has the main engine extending, at the centre-line, into the fore part of No 6 hold. The slim deckhouse is built over the machinery space and its height has been increased to maximise visibility from the wheelhouse, and thereby allow additional container stowage.

The cargo holds can accommodate eight tiers of normal containers plus one tier of high-cube dimension, and the frame spacing in those compartments has been enlarged so that the longitudinal clearance between TEU on the hatch covets can comply with Australian MUA rules.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Length, oa...
Length, bp...
Breadth, moulded ..
Depth, moulded

TO MAIN DOCK... seceeesecseeetesteesessesseseseseesessessense 24.20m
Width of double skin
 side ....
 bottom
Draught
 design
 scantling
Gross wee
Displacement
Deadweight

COSIQN oo. eeeeeeeeeeees

SCANING. 0... ceececeeeeeeeeeeee
Speed, service, 90% MCR, 15% sea margin
Bunkers
 heavy oil..
 diesel oil..
Water ballast.
Classification
 ..276.20m -.263.80m -..40.00m
 -.68,228dwt ...25,92knots
 .Lloyd's Register of Shipping +100A1
 ‘Container Ship’, IWS, SOLAS, Chapter II-2/Reg. 19, +LMC, UMS, ShipRight, SDA, FDA, CM, LI, SCM

Percentage of high-tensile steel used in construction .
Heel control system
Main engine
Design..
Model ...

Number...
Type of fuel...
Output
Propeller
Material
Designer/manufacturer..
Number
 ..Nickel-aluminium-bronze
CSBC/Hyundai

Pitch
Diameter
Speed
Diesel-driven alternators

Engine make/type.

TYPe Of UCL. eceecccccscecccesccsseesssceescsvsesservavavsnvavevstsees HFO
Output/speed. 4 X 2100kW/720rev/min
Alternator make/type Hyundai/HFC5 710-14K-SB
Output/speed 4 x 1980kW/720rev/min
Mooring equipment
NUMDEP oe eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee eee 2x mooring winch/windlass 6 x mooring winch
Make.
Type..
Hatch covers
Design..... MacGregor
Manufacturer... CSBC
Containers
Lengths...
Total TEU .... on deck . in holds..
 homogeneously loaded to 14 tonnes swil..
Reefer plugs
Ballast control system

Pleiger Far East ..electric-hydraulic remote

Type
Complement

Officers

Crew..

Spare.

Suez/repair crew.
Stern appendage
Bow thruster
 -FAC512B-20L
Fire extinguishing systems
Cargo holds/engineroom
Accommodation .....
Waste disposal plant
Incinerator
Make... eeeeeeeeceeesteseeteensesmiesssesesesssseseeseaeres Sunflame
LN, [=] a OSV-1200SA1
Waste compactor
Make ...
Model ..
Waste shredder/crusher
Make...
Model
Contract date..
Launch/float-out date
Delivery date

NK Co Ltd .Seaplus Co Ltd
 ....Electrolux
 ened 520ML60 ..20 March 2003 w4 July 2004 8 October 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
CSCL ASIA: Samsung TEU total moves
 ever upwards

Shipbuilder:............ Samsung Heavy Industries

Co Ltd, Korea
Vessel's name:..... ...CSCL Asia
HUI] NUIMDEN: oo. ececcceecsceseessssescetereeeees 1488

Seaspan (Cyprus) Ltd, Cyprus/CSCL, China
Designer: ........ eee Samsung Heavy Industries
Co. Ltd, Korea

Model test establishment used:...Samsung Ship
Model Basin, Korea

FIAQ! cece .... Cyprus
Total number of sister
 ships already completed: .......c.ccccccceeeeeee Nil
Total number of sister

Ships Still ON OPEL: oe ccc eeeceeteeteteteteeeeees 4

R EADERS of Significant Ships will have noted the
 ost yearly increase in size of the giant container ships which now handle so much of the world's general cargo trade. Samsung's own contribution to the vast fleet is rapidly approaching 200 delivered or on order, and is currently headed by this new 8500TEU class, of which CSCL Asia is the lead vessel of a group of five.
She and her sisters were ordered by the Vancouver- based Seaspan and have been chartered to the China
Shipping Group (CSCL), which played a pivotal role in creation of the quintet. They represent the largest ships yet built by the company - a distinction soon to be lost to a new 9600TEU series now building at the
Geoje Island site, and later possibly to a 12,000TEU class under development.

These recurring increases in container capacity are generally accommodated by adding an extra section into the vessel's length, consequently CSCL Asia has length oa and length bp dimensions 11m greater than OOCL
Shenzhen (Significant Ships of 2003) but retains other characteristics. She can therefore accept an additional
FEU bay (total 16) in way of holds 1 to 8, forward of the machinery space/superstructure, with three bays above No 9 hold and one more right aft over the mooring deck and hatch cover stowage area. Container capacity in the holds is 3877TEU with either 4323TEU ot 4591TEU carried on deck, depending on whether stacks are seven or eight tiers high.

Stowage is based on 17 rows carried on deck and 15 in the holds. No restrictions are placed on the use of high-cube containers, and 45ft units can be loaded directly on to No 3 hatch cover, otherwise these are stowed above the third tier of each hatch. A total of 700FEU self-contained, air-cooled refrigerated containers can be loaded on deck, and dangerous goods can be carried in Nos 1 to 3 holds, also on deck.
Lashing bridges are fitted on deck between the hatches, and 'on-deck' cell guides support containers carried above the mooring deck aft.

The hull is of double-skin construction forming a tank arrangement comprising side and bilge spaces, and three transverse double-bottom compartments devoted to water ballast and bunker capacity. Two side tanks
 46
 port and starboard, are arranged for automatic heel adjustment with ballast transfer across the vessel effected by a heeling pump. To accommodate environmental concerns, ballast water exchanges have been considered in accordance with IMO Resolution
A868 (20) and Lloyd's Register's 'EP' notation.
Structural design follows Samsung's standards for this class of by having hatch coamings form a continuous a major longitudinal strength member.

Choice of propelling machinery for the Samsung range of container carriers covers both Sulzer and
MAN B&W types of similar output, and owes much to an owner's preference. For this CSCL series, a MAN
B&W 12K98MC-C main engine, built by HSD Engine
Co and developing 68,520kW at 104rev/min, has been selected. When operating at 90% MCR, this produces a service speed of 25.20knots. With no main engine- driven alternator specified, electrical supply is obtained from four Taiyo 2700kW alternators having STX-built
MAN B&W 6L32/40 diesel prime movers.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, 0a...
Length, bp....
Breadth, moulded
Depth, moulded
TO UPPer COCK oo. cccecetecceeeseetetensesesesecetseseneseaes 24.60m
Width of double skin side bottom..
Draught design scantling .
Gross
Deadweight design scantling..
Speed, service, Bunkers heavy oil ..
CiCSE] Oil... cece eeecesceesteteeseeeseseeneneteseeseststsneneeaees 560m?
Water ballast..
Fuel consumption main engine auxiliaries .
Classification ....
 84,200dwt 101,700dwt ..25.20knots
 ...258.30tonnes/day ..30.70tonnes/day
Lloyd's Register + 100A1, Container Ship, ShipRight (SDA, FDA, CM), + LMC, UMS, *IWS, SCM, EP, 
CAC, NAV 1
Percentage of high-tensile steel USEd IN CONSHIUCTION oo... eee eesteesteneneneeees 60%
Heel control equipment....One pump and wing ballast tanks
Main engine
Design .. . MAN B&W
Model... 12K98MC-C
Manufacturer HSD Engine Co Ltd
NUMDE? oe ccceececeeseeeseeteseeeseeeseseeteteesesesessscseetessesessieeea 1
Type of fuel... FO
Output.. ...68,520kW/104rev/min
Propeller
Mate rdall ccsscs carsisssieariseseciseenenns Nickel-aluminium-bronze
Designer.....Samsung/Mecklenburger Metallguss (MMG)

Diameter .

Engine make/type.

Tye Of FUL sec ceceececesesceseeseseseseecscssscsseeessesereeeee HFO

Output/speed. 4 X 2880kW/720rev/min

Alternator Make ......ccccecccceecseseeeetesesesneneneesesssnenaees Taiyo

OUtPUL/SPEEM oo. eececeeceseeeeeeteeees 4 x 2700kW/720rev/min
Boilers

Number

Type..

Make ..KangRim

Output.. .5.50tonnes/h
Mooring equipm

NUMDE ooo. eects seeeeeseeeeneee 2 x mooring winch/windlass 6 x mooring winch
Make Rolls-Royce
TYG sensi csmsave nen esassssst s85% donche neonnnes High-pressure hydraulic
Hatch covers

Design/manufacturer. MacGregor

Type Lift-on/lift-off pontoons
Containers
Lengths 20ft; 40ft; 45ft
Cell guides.. -Holds and aft deck
Total TEU capacity. ...8468 on deck... 4591 in holds ..... 3877 homogeneously loaded to 14tonnes.. » 6345
Reefer plugs .700FEU
Tiers/rows (maximum) on deck.. 7(8)/17 in holds.. 9/15
Ballast control system
Make.. Danfoss Marine
Type.. .. Hydraulic valve control

Complement
Officers..

Suez/repair crew.
Bow thruster
Make .

Bridge control system
Make
One man operation

Fire detection system
Make...
Type...

Fire extinguishing systems
Make
Holds and engineroom..
Cabins and public spaces ...

Radars
Number .
Make...
Models ..

Integrated bridge system
Make...
Model.

Waste disposal plant
Incinerator

Make....
Model

Contract date..

Launch/float-out date -

Delivery date
 ..Saracom-Thorn
Conventional

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
DISHA: Daewoo LNG carrier

Qatar-India trade

Shipbuilder: .......... ....Daewoo Shipbuilding &

Marine Engineering

Vessel's name:...
Hull number: ...
Owner/operator:

MOL Consortium, Japan, India, and Qatar
Model test establishment used:.. we
Flag: ..... ve
Total number of siste

Total number of sister
Ships still ON OFer: vce ecceceesseeseeseeeseeeeeeee (e)

SHA has been built to a basis Daewoo design
 developed around what has become a popular size of LNG carrier - 140,000m’; this example of the type, however, is particularly noteworthy because of the inclusion in the specification of a so-called BWSR system. This feature relates to a problem encountered in the vessel's trading pattern, which involves regular loading of LNG at Ras Laffan in Qatar, for discharge at the Indian port of Dahej, where, duting the gas unloading process, tankers simultaneously take on sea- water ballast. The light-density sediment (silt) which this contains enters the tanks, where, if it is not removed, it solidifies on the tank floor. To eliminate this problem, a ballast water sediment removal (BWSR) system has been devised, operating from the same software which enables the vessel to automatically perform the ballast water exchange programme, and is incorporated into the ship's integrated automation system.

The ship design itself conforms to the general layout now adopted for this class of vessel, and has a single- deck without forecastle, but lowered at the aft end to provide a mooring deck as part of a transom stern atrangement incorporating an open-water sternframe and semi-balanced rudder. Forward of this is the machinery space containing a Kawasaki UA360 type steam turbine installation with integral gearbox, developing 26,480kW MCR at 88rev/min, to drive a FP propeller for a service speed of 19.50knots at 90% full power.

Electrical supply comes, somewhat unusually for a traditional LNG carrier, from three 3430kW diesel- driven alternator sets, and steam for the main turbines and other uses is obtained from two vertical watertube boilers arranged to burn heavy oil or boil-off gas, or a mixture of both. Bunker capacity is sufficient for a steaming range at 90% MCR of 13,000nm, allowing a five-day margin without the use of boil-off gas. A
Brunvoll 1700kW bow thruster is installed to assist manoeuvrability.
 48

The hull is double skinned, with the space thus formed including top and bottom wing tanks, and given over to water ballast, along with the peaks and forward deeptank. Enclosed within this arrangement are four cargo holds separated from each other by cofferdams, and extending above the upper deck into a fore and aft raised trunk. Each hold is fitted with a cargo tank constructed in accordance with a GTT NO96 E-2 membrane cargo containment system, suitable for the carriage of a cargo of maximum SG 0.50 at -163°C, and a maximum boil-off rate of 0.15% cargo volume.

Cargo handling is accomplished by eight (two for each tank), electrically driven, submerged, vertical centrifugal, 1650m°/h pumps, capable of effecting discharge in 12 hours. Loading is by means of shore facilities and is carried out after the tanks have been cooled to the required temperature, and vapour generated during loading returned to shore using high- duty compressors installed in a deckhouse on the statboatd side of the upper deck.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Breadth, moulded ..
Depth, moulded
Width of double skin

Draught
COSIQN oe eecececcseeeesteeeeeeeesesesesnetssesescsneneneseseenenenees scantling . we

Gross .......

Displacement

Lightweight

Deadweight design scantling..

Block coefficient...

Speed, service 90% MCR uu. eeeeseceseeseeeeereenenees 19.50knots

Cargo capacity
VIQUID VOIUME oo. eeececeeceseseseeteseesesteteseateeeneneees

Bunkers heavy oil.. diesel oil

Water ballast.

Percentage of segregated ballast

Fuel consumption

Classification...
 ..111,100tonnes ....30,000tonnes
 -Bureau Veritas 1 + Hull, iquefied Gas Carrier/LNG, Ship type 2G (-163°C, 500kg/m*, 0.25bar), unrestricted navigation, + VeritSTAR HULL, + AUT-UMS, +SYS-NEQ-1, + MON-SHAFT, INWATERSURVEY
Percentage of high tensile steel USE iN CONSTFUCTION..... cece eseeeeeseeneneeeeeenes Nil
Main engine
Steam turbine
Design ...
 + H, and boll-oit gas

Type of fue 4 ..26,480kKW/88rev/min
Propeller
Material ... ...Nickel-aluminium-bronze

Designer/manufacturer.

Speed

Type Of UCL... cececccceseeesestesetesesesesesestststesesseseseeeers MDO
Output/speed..

Alternator Make/ty pe oo... ceceeseseseeeetetetereseseseeteneseseseeeseees -

Output.. 3 x 3430kW
Exhaust-gas scru

Type .. Centrifugal,vertical electrically driven

Position. Main engine
Boilers

Number....

Type .. «Vertical, watertube

Make. .Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
Output.. .2 x 63,000kg/h
Mooring equipmen
NUMDET oo... eee eeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeee 2 x mooring winch/windlass 7 X mooring winch
Make.... .. Rolls-Royce
Type... ectric-hydraulic
Cargo tanks
Number

Grades of cargo carried
Product range...
Cargo pumps
 y
Complement
Officers..
Crew.. ten
Suez/repair crew.
Bow thruster

S-band: BR-3460CA-S312M
X-band: BR-3460CA-X28M
Integrated bridge SYStOM oo... cece eeenetsteeeeeeerers Yes
Waste disposal plant
Incinerator
Make....
Model..
Sewage plant
Make ...
Model
Contract date.
Launch/float-out date ..22 February 2003
Delivery date... ccccccececteeeeeeetseereceeee 9 January 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
FURE NORD: Shanghai-built, Swedish product tanker design

Shipbuilder: ......... Shanghai Edward Shipbuilding
Co Ltd, People's Republic of China
VESSEl'S NAME! ecceceteretetete tenses ..Fure Nord

Hull NUMDE: oo. ee ee eect teres 129
Owner/operator:......Furetank Rederi AB, Sweden
DO@SIQNEM: oc eeeeeeeeteeeee Fartygskonstruktioner AB
 (FKAB), Sweden
Model test establishment used: ....SSPA, Sweden

FAQ! cecececscesceceseteeseeteeseseseeeesesseseeeessssenees Sweden
Total number of sister ships already completed)... Nil
Total number of sister ships still on orders... 1 (plus 1 for another owner)

IKAB was one of the first European design
 consultants to become involved in the burgeoning
Chinese shipbuilding market, and from its base in
Uddevalla, once the home of one of Sweden's leading shipyards, it has introduced an interesting portfolio of blueprints, notably product tankers, for clients signing contracts in the People's Republic of China. Fure Nord is a medium-sized example of this type of vessel, and features a double-hull construction within which the cargo space is divided into six pairs of cargo tanks by troughed, transverse and centreline bulkheads.

Two slop tanks are located in the extended forecastle, above the upper deck, on which a cylindrical, 40m’ cargo drain tank is located. With all deckhead stiffening arranged externally on the upper deck, and side and bottom framing contained within the double hull, the cargo tanks offer easily cleaned inner surfaces, to which an
International Interline coating has been applied. Cleaning the tanks is carried out using 26 fixed, and two portable
Scanjet units.

Cargo is handled by 12 Framo, hydraulically driven submerged pumps, each rated at 330m*/h, whilst two similar 100m*/h pumps serve the slop tanks. A portable pump of 70m*/h is also available. Six grades of cargo can be carried, and simultaneous loading to at least two tanks through any cargo crossover is possible at 1200m°*/h.
Discharge rate is 2000m’/h. Individual loading/discharge deck lines connect each cargo tank to the midships manifold, and there are separate drop lines in each tank.

The slop tanks also have individual suction and droplines, plus one connection to the cargo manifold and overboard. Side, double bottom, and fore peak tanks are allocated for water ballast, handled by two Framo 500m°/h submerged pumps. A thermal oil heating system is installed, with primary heat from two oil-fired and one exhaust-gas boiler. Side tanks at the forward end of the machinery space, P&S, serve as bunker and settling tanks, and are protected at the shell-side by cofferdams designated as technical water tanks, and across the forward ends as voids.

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004

Fure Nord's design features an extended forecastle on which is built an extensive breakwater affording protection from the elements for the mooring equipment.
A gangway above the upper deck provides a link to the poop where the engine control toom, workshops and stotes ate located. Above this are four accommodation levels and a full-width wheelhouse complete with navigation and control equipment, including Saab level and alarm systems and a Napa loading computer.

Main propulsion is provided by a single Mak 7M43 medium-speed diesel engine developing 6300kW at 500rev/min and connected through a Renk reduction gear to a highly-skewed, stainless steel, CP Kamewa ptopeller running at 118rev/min. A power take-off from the gearbox is coupled to a 1000kW alternator, and three
Volvo/Newage Stamford diesel-alternators are fitted, each producing 750kW. A Brunvoll retractable, azimuthing thruster is fitted forward, and the rudder is of the Schilling Mariner type with an ice-knife incorporated into the stern frame.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
 .144.00m -134.40m

Length, oa..
Length, bp.....
Breadth, moulded.
Depth, moulded, to upper deck
 bottom...

Draught design... .8.00m scantling.. .9.20m
Gross ........ .11,548gt
Displacement, 9.20m draught 21,556tonnes
Lightweight ...6557tonnes
Deadweight design... ..13,200dwt scantling..
 ..15,999dwt

Block coefficient ...
Speed, service at 8!
Cargo capacity liquid volume....
Bunkers heavy oil... diesel oil
Water ballast...
Classification .

Tanker/Chemical Tanker, IMO Type II, ESP, Unrestricted Navigation, Ice Class 1A, AUT-UMS, MON-SHAFT, STAR-HULL, STAR-MACH

Percentage of high-tensile steel Used IN CONSTFUCTION 0... cece tee es teeeeee approx 20%

Type of fuel used
Output
Gearbox

Output speed.. .118rev/min

Propeller

Material
Designer/manufacture
Number.

Speed...
Special adaptations
Main-engine driven alternator
 ...ABB/AKM 450 S4 .1250kVA/1800rev/min

Diesel-driven alternators
 3

Engine make/type ..Volvo Penta/D34A MT HE

Type of fuel used. ..MDO

Output/speed....... . rev/min

Alternator make/type.. Newage/Stamford/HCM 634JZ

Output/speed 3 x 750kW/1800rev/min
Boilers
 ..1 x TOH 2907 V40, oil fired x EGH900V30, exhaust gas
 1 x 2907kW, oil fired
 1 x 900kW, exhaust gas

NUMDEM oes reeeeeeeeeeeeee 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 6 x mooring winch

MAKC oo. cs eseeceeseeteesseecevsnesesseeerenesesees Rauma Brattvaag
TYPO. eeeeceeeesesteseseeeseeneaesesneeeneeeseseeseasesseeee Electric-hydraulic

Lifesaving equipment

NUMbEr/tYPe oe ceeeteeeteteeeeeeeeeee 1 x 20-person enclosed free-fall lifeboat; 1 x MOB craft

MAK oo. eecececcecces testes esseesesnesceesesssscseesesesseseanseeeeeneees Norsafe

Grades of cargo carried

Tank coating.

Stainless steel..
Cargo pumps

NUMbeT/tyPe@ oo... eects eee 12 x SD150; 2 x SD100;
 1 x TK (portable)
 ....Framo
 .. International Interline beeen Piping: AISI 316L

Stainless steel ..
Capacity.

Cargo/ballast control system

MAKE ooo. eececeeeteeesteeseseeseacscsereenssseesesneesseseesseesesesseeens Saab
Complement
Total... 17 persons

Cabins ..13 single/2 double
Special rudder. Schilling Mariner
Bow thruster

Make/type. Brunvoll/AR-63 LTC-1750-980, retractable

Number..

Output ...
Fire extinguishing system
Cargo deck/pipe tunnel..
Make
Engineroom
Local protection.
 .Unitor
«CO; ..watermist

Waste disposal plant
Incinerator

Make...

Model ..
Contract date..

Launch/float-out date.

Delivery date
 5 March 2004 ..4 October 2004
 51
GAZ de FRANCE ENERGY: diesel-electric LNG carrier with CS1 cargo
 containment

Shipbuilder:.....Alstom Chantiers de |’Atlantique, France

Vessel's name: ...Gaz de France Energy

Hull number: .....
Owner/operator: ............ Gaz de France, France
Designer..........Alstom Chantiers de I'Atlantique, France
Model test establishment used:.............. MARIN, The Netherlands
FLAG? .oeccecccecceeteeeeeeeeeeteetenteeteneeesseneeeetents France
Total number of sister ships already Ccompleted)........ccceeeeeceree Nil
Total number of sister ships still on order: ........ eee Nil (of this size)

TEAM turbine-driven power installations have
 been first choice for LNG tankers for more than 40 years, ptincipally because of their reliability and the ease with which they can burn boil-off gas produced from the cargo. However, fuel-efficiency of the system is not high, and much comparative research has been cattied out to find an economic alternative, with dual- fuel, diesel-electric power generation now considered to offer perhaps the best solution to the problem, although ships with heavy-fuel-burning two-stroke machinery, plus a reliquefaction plant, have very recently been ordered. Following successful advances with its gas-engine technology, Wartsila has now developed a diesel-electric system centred on its range of 'DF' (dual-fuel) diesel engines, first introduced for marine applications in 2003.

The arrangement adopted for Gaz de France Energy employs four Wartsila 6L50DF 5700kW main engines, each coupled to a Leroy Somer 5500kW alternator.
These supply power for domestic use, and for the two 9500kW propulsion motors, also supplied by Leroy
Somer. A Renk-twin input/single-output reduction gearbox with integral thrust bearing is next in the drive- line, making the connection from the motors to the single FP propeller. The main engines are positioned in pairs, in two separate gas-tight compartments.

In principle, dual-fuel engines can be operated on either diesel or gas, or a combination of the two, with automatic transfer from one to the other without loss of engine power or speed. However, Gaz de France Energy
 54
 is designed for continuous operation in the gas mode with the natural boil-off gas normally sufficient to cover a major part of requitements, supplemented if required, by forcing additional boil-off. Diesel oil pilot injection is provided to start combustion.

Claims made for the dual-fuel/diesel-electric system include a 30% increase in efficiency over the traditional steam turbine installation, plus added redundancy and a drastic reduction in emissions. In addition, with less oil fuel to be carried, more cargo can be loaded. A further bonus is the use of exhaust gas boilers at each diesel alternator to supply 'free heat’ to the cargo and hotel systems. Two electtically heated boilers are also provided.

The introduction of an alternative propulsion system is not the only major change from the traditional adopted for this new class of LNG tanker, which comptises Gaz de France Energy of 74,000m° capacity, and two later units, with a capacity of 154,000m’, since all three feature a new membrane cargo containment system developed by GTT (an amalgamation of the former Gaz Transport and Technigaz companies).
Known as the GIT CS1 system (Combined System No 1), this combines the efficient glassfibre-reinforced, polyurethane foam insulation panels, incorporating a secondary triplex barrier popularised by the Technigaz
Mk III system, with the equally successful flat Invar primary membrane of the GT NO96 concept.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, 0a..
Length, bp..
Breadth, moulded ....
Depth, moulded tO MAIN COCK veces ceecreeeeee eens cerseseeeneeeneees 22.00m
Draught design .. scantling
Gross
Deadweight design
Block coefficient
Speed, service, 85% MCR
Cargo capacity
Bunkers
 -219.50m ..208.50m .34.95m
 ..18.20knots w.74,500m9

Classification... .Bureau Veritas + Hull, + Mach, Liquefied Gas Carrier LNG, Unrestricted navigation, Veristar Hull, AUT-UMS, MONSHAFT, Cargo Control, SYSNEQ 1
Diesel-electric system
Main engines
 6L50DF
LNG/MDO

Type of fuel used .

Output/speed
Alternators

Output/speed
Propulsion motors

DESIGN sa xccesan semen en ccomecesnes co nn meenenen

Number...

Gearbox
Make....
Model ..
Number ..
 1 x twin input/single output 104rev/min
Propeller

Material
Designer/manufacturer Lips

Exhaust-gas scrubbing equipment
Manufacturer ..

«electric
Elpanne Technik
 2 x 1500kW

Cranes
Number .4 x 2tonnes
MaKe wee ce ceeeeseseseseseeseeeseseeeseecsesnssseeeeceeeereeees AMGC
Tasks.. .Handling emergency pumps
 2 x mooring winch/windlass 7 x mooring winch
Make..
Type ..
Cargo pumps
NUMDEP 0... eee cece ee tees eeeeeseseseseeeseseeenenes 2 in each tank
Type...
Make..
Capacity ..
Cargo control system
Make ooo. eeccccceeeceeseeecsceecseseseecseseseeesssseaseeneeas Foxboro

Electric
 .900m*/h each

Complement
Officers .

Suez /repair crew
Bow thruster

Ome man Operation ssi isssisssase sanscsitassssmasmaaciassnaacees Yes
Fire detection system

Make..

Type...
Fire extinguishing system

Cargo spaces: make

Engineroom: make....
Radars

Number .

Waste disposal plant
Incinerator
Make ...
Model..
Waste compactor
Make...
Model..
Sewage plant
Make ...
Model..

Deerberg .IRL50 580kW
 ..Evac vacuum collecting system
 ..Biologic STP55
Contract date. February 2002
Launch/float-out date .. ... January 2004
Delivery: Date sas cia cosssesasasasscsn svsvensaussonsaessna ams castarnenstneaiasaassaanead -* *Although delivery was scheduled for end-2004, handover may be in 2005.

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
GEESTSTROOM: North Sea feeder ship for 45ft containers

Shipbuilder: ... Damen Shipyards Cargo Vessels, The Netherlands (completely built at Damen Galatz, Romania)

Vessel'S NAME! secre Geeststroom
HUI] NUMDEN: eee cece eteeeeeeeeteereeereeeee 844
Owner/operator............. Reederei Jorg Kdpping, 
Germany

Designer........ Damen Shipyards Cargo Vessels, The Netherlands

Model tank establishment used:............. MARIN, 
The Netherlands

Flag: .... Antigua
Total number of sister
 ships already completed): ........ cece eee 0

Total number of sister ships still on Order: ww. (including 10 vessels for other owners)

DECISION taken by intermodal transporter

Geest to standardise, as far as possible, its future
Anglo-European operations on 45ft high-cube containers (currently the maximum size used on
European roads), has led Damen to introduce this
Combi Feeder 800 design. Geeststroom is believed to be the first vessel of this type specifically configured to suit this larger box size (but which can also accommodate conventional 20ft, 30ft, 48ft, and 49ft containers).

Because the upper deck is raised by almost 3m forward from a position between Nos 1 and 2 holds, maximising container stowage at the resulting structural break produced a particular problem due to the differing deck heights. This seemed likely to present an unused deck space, however, cargo loading specialist
MacGregor solved this potential problem by designing a system of hydraulically operated, folding supports which fit into the gap between the two sets of hatches, and when raised allow an additional 3 x 8 rows of TEU to be carried in this location. The versatility of the container stowage attangements introduced into the design mean that Standard ISO boxes of 2.438m, 2.50m (pallet-friendly) and 2.6m widths, and 8ft, 8ft 6in and 9ft 6in heights are all provided for.

MacGregor was also called upon to develop a removable cell-guide system for the holds to suit the carriage of 40/45ft containers, the overall result being a total TEU/FEU capacity of 804/361 (598/264 on deck: 206/97 in holds). The same company supplied the high-stowing, hydraulically operated folding hatch covers, arranged in 2 + 2 panel sets and designed for a
 56
 uniformly distributed loading of 1.75tonnes/m’, and container stack loadings of 60tonnes (20ft units), 70tonnnes (30ft), MOtonnes (40ft) and 95tonnes(45ft).
Electrical supply is available for 180 refrigerated containers, and provision is included for the carriage of hazardous cargoes.

The machinery room is abaft the cargo space and contains a MaK 9M43 main engine developing 8400kW
MCRat 500trev/min and driving a CP propeller through a Flender Navilus gearbox. Service speed at 90% MCR, 15% sea margin and allowing for a 200kW PTO requirement, is 18knots at a design draught of 7.32m.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa...
Length, bp... .
Depth, moulded to main deck amidships forward......
Width of double skin side ... bottom
Draught, design .
Gross ..
Deadweight, design ..
Speed, service (90% MCR: 15% sea margin: 2OOKW PTO) uu. eeccecceeeseeteeteeessteestseseneeeeesereee
Bunkers heavy oil. diesel oil.
Water ballast
Fuel consumption (main engine only) i
Classification ........ccccccce Germanischer Lloyd, +100A5 E3, +MC E3 AUT IW. Equipped for
Finnish/Swedish Ice Class 1A.
Container cargoes in holds and on hatch covers, fitted for dangerous goods to SOLAS reg: 19 II-2 (except Class VII)
Percentage of high-tensile steel used in construction .

Gearbox
Make...
Model..
Number...
Output spee

Propeller
Material
Designer/manufacturer
Number ..
Pitch...
Diameter

Nickel-aluminium-bronze

Wartsila

Speed..
Main-engine
Number
Make/type... Stamford/HCM 734H
Output/speed. 1600kW

Diesel-driven alternators

Engine make.. Scania

Type of fuel. ... MDO

Output........ 2 X 455kW

Alternator make/type Stamford/HCM 534E

Output. 2 X 433kW
Mooring equip

NUMBEF ....cscssccccssscrssnsavassonses 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 2 x mooring winch

Make....
Type ..electric-hydraulic
Lifesaving equipment
Number .. .1 x 16-person free-fall
Type.. ..GFF 5.7M
Make.... Hateke
Hatch covers
Design. .MacGregor
Type..... igh-stowing folding
Containers
Lengths .. 20ft; SOft; 40ft; 45ft; 48ft; 49ft
Heights.... .8ft; 8ft Gin; Oft Gin
Cell guides..... ..moveable type in holds
Total TEU/FEU Capacity... cece 804/361
On deck.... ..598/264
In holds 206/97

Homogeneously loaded to 14tonnes.
Reefer plugs
Tiers/rows

Complement
Officers...
Crew....
Suez crew ..

Output
Stern thruster

Make ...

Number

One man operation ..
Fire extinguishing systems

Cargo holds...
Engineroom....
Radars
NUMDET oo... eee eeeeesseseeeessesesscseneceseeecseeesscsssessesseeseieenseats 2
Make.... ...Furuno
Models . 2135SBB
Integrated bridge SYStOM 0... cece cece eeeeeteeeeneenees No
 .20 December 2002 ..8 September 2004
January 2005

Contract date
Launch/float-out date ..
Delivery date

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
GOLAR VIKING: Hyundai's first membrane-type LNG tanker

Shipbuilder:........... Hyunda Heavy Industries
Co Ltd, Korea

Vessel's name Golar Viking 1460

Hull number ..... we
Owner/operator ...Golar LNG Ltd, Norway
DeSIQNel?..... eee Hyundai Heavy Industries
Co Ltd, Korea .. Hyundai
Maritime Research Institute, Korea
FIAQ: ceeeeeeceeet eee esetsesteeseeeeteeees Marshall Islands

Total number of sister

Total number of sister ships still ON OFder oo. eeeeeceeeee teens wen

N the course of its 30-plus years existence, Hyundai
 has established a leader's reputation in most avenues of cargo ship design and construction, not least as a builder of LNG and LPG carriers. An example of the latter, Polar Viking, appeats elsewhere in this review, built to a design which has become the Hyundai standard for this type of vessel. Golar Viking, however, breaks new ground for the Korean yard since it is the first time it has used the Gaz Transport/Technigaz (GTT) membrane technique as a cargo containment system for LNG, replacing the Moss Maritime ‘spherical tank' method always employed previously (see
LNG Rivers: Significant Ships of 2002). It is understood that the GIT system will now become standard for
Hyundai tankers of this type, with the Moss technique adopted only for new-generation floating offshore terminals where its sloshing characteristics in part-load conditions will be advantageous.

Golar Viking is a flush-decked vessel without forecastle, but with a lowered mooring deck aft above a transom stern. The machinery space and deckhouse block are also at the aft end, with the fore body occupied by four cargo Mk 3 tanks which extend above the upper deck where they are contained in a trunk. The hull is double-skinned forming water ballast tanks and the cargo spaces are insulated in accordance with the
GTT Mk 3 system, utilising 270mm thick reinforced polyurethane foam to satisfy the low daily boil-off rate of 0.15%.

Cargo and ballasting operations, including monitoring, are carried out via a shore manifold at each side of the upper deck amidships, and managed from a control room situated below the wheelhouse.

Discharge is accomplished using two electric submerged pumps at the bottom of each tank, rated at 1700m°/h, with pressure in the tanks maintained by gas pumped in from shore or produced by the onboard
LNG vaporiser. An emergency cargo pump is also fitted, coming into action if both pumps in a tank should fail.

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004

Although Hyundai is actively exploring alternative means of propulsion for LNG carriers (and at the end of 2004 secured its first orders for diesel-powered ships), a steam turbine set is to power Golar Viking, to ptovide the best option, and an installation of this type produced by the Group's machinery arm in conjunction with Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, is fitted. This comprises high- and low-pressure turbines and an astern unit developing 27,940kW, and driving a FP propeller through a Mitsubishi double-reduction gearbox for a service speed of 19.70knots at 90% MCR.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa...

Depth, moulded to main deck.. to trunk deck..

Width of double skin side .... bottom.

Draught design scantling

Gross ...

Displaceme

Lightweight

Deadweight design scantling..

Block coefficient.

Speed, service, 9!

Cargo capacity
HiQUIG VOLUME oo... cece eects teseseseeneeeteieseseeeseeeeee 140,207m*

Bunkers heavy oil.. diesel oil.

Water ballast...

Fuel consumption fuel Oil MOE oo... eeeeeeeeeeeeteeeeteeeeeees 174.00tonnes/day
 ..70,000dwt ..79,900dwt beveeeees 0.746 19.70knots
 ..55.50tonnes/day boil-off gas ..96.70tonnes/day
Classification.........0ccecccccceee eee eeeeee eeees Det Norske Veritas
 +1A1, Tanker for Liquefied Gas, Ship
Type 2G (-163°C, 500kg/h, 0.25bar g), Nauticus (new-building), EO, W1-OC, ICS, TMON, PLUS-2, LCS(SID), COAT2, CLEAN
Main engine (Steam turbine)

Manufacturer.. ..Hyundai-Mitsubishi

Gearbox
Type ....
Make
Model ..
Number..........
Output speed.

Propeller

Material ..Nickel-aluminium-bronze

Designer/manufacture..

Steam turbine-driven alternators
Number...
Make/type

Shinko/RG92-2

Output/speed.. x 3500kW/1800rev/min
Diesel-driven alternators

Number

Engine make/type..

Type of fuel...

Output/speed..

Alternator make/type . .... Hyundai/HSJ-7

Output/speed 3500kW/720rev/min
Exhaust-gas scrubbing equipment

TYP oo. eeee Shell and tube type with an extended surface

POSITION... ssvscsscenerectnssenensanastsassasieassessed On main boilers
Boilers

Number

Type... Dual-fuel water tube

Make. -Mitsubishi

Output.. 68,000kg/h
Mooring equipment

NUMDEF .wscssssssacssescsssinscnvssce 2.x mooring winch/windlass
 2 x mooring winch
Rolls-Royce group ....Low-pressure hydraulic

Make .
Type ..
Cargo tanks
Number
Product range.
Coated tanks..
Cargo pumps
Number
Type...
Make.
Capacity
Cargo/ballast control systems
Make .
Type...
Complement
 .4 x GTT Mk 3 membrane type
 .-8 X 1700m*/h
 .. Yokogawa France uted Control system

Bridge control system
Make .
Type..
One man operation

Fire detection system
Make .

Kongsberg .Bridge line console

Consilium Marine

Type... .CS3000
Integrated

Make.... Kongsberg

Model ... .Seamap 10 (ECDIS): JH17C03 (conning)
Contract date 24 July 2001
Launch/float-out date .. ...16 August 2003

Delivery date... .November/December 2004
 59
AA
 au

HAMANASU: 20% fuel-cost reduction for a ferry with CRP-Azipod propulsion

Shipbuilder:......Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd, (Nagasaki Shipyard), Japan

Vessel's name: . ... Hamanasu 2191

Hull NUIMBE™)SS 0... cncereregnnns csscanessetammessswaite rs oe

Owner/operator: ......Shin Nihonkai Ferry Co Ltd, Japan

Designer........... Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd, Japan

Model test establishment
UL 0 nee Mitsubishi Nagasaki
R&D Centre, Japan
Total number of sister

Total number of sister ships still ON OFAEr eee eet tetete retest 1 (delivered June 28, 2004)

To importance to the Japanese economy of fast passenger/vehicle ferries which provide vital links between the ports on the country’s long coastline, has been highlighted by the inclusion of a number of ships of this type in Significant Ships over the years. Suzuran (1996) is of particular interest to this report since it is similar to our subject vessel - but with 15% less transportation capacity, and because it was possible to run both this 'old' ship, and the new design on exactly the same route in similar conditions, to allow a full- scale comparison between a ‘conventional’ twin-screw diesel installation, and that of the hybrid CRP (contra- rotating propeller) pod system, installed as a world-first in Hamanasu. ‘This exercise clearly demonstrated that this brand-new advance offers a 20% fuel saving, with knock-on improvements in exhaust gas emissions and other aspects.

The ABB CRP Azipod concept (initially developed by
ABB with Samsung, in Korea, for large container liners) consists of a pod propulsion unit with stainless steel FP ptopeller, operating behind a single, conventional, nickel-aluminium-bronze CP propeller. The two ptopellers face each other in a single-skeg hull form, and ate contra-totating. The Kawasaki-designed main ptopeller is driven mechanically by two 12,600kW
Wartsila 12V46C main engines, linked through a twin- input/single-output gearbox. Two similar sized engines ate also installed to drive the two 12,200kW ABB alternators which provide power for the ABB propulsion pod, and for general ship service power. A third Daihatsu/ABB alternator set producing 2760kW is also fitted for auxiliary use.

On trials, the hybrid machinery arrangement is considered to have produced excellent results with 32.04knots achieved on the measured mile. In service, the 30.50knots required to maintain an operational schedule of 20hours each direction on the Tsuruga (Honshu Island) to Otaru (Hokkaido Island) run, has been regularly attained, with the fuel savings noted above confirmed by actual records over a five-month petiod.

In addition to the propulsive benefits of the CRP
Azipod system as an entity, the pod unit provides exceptional manoeuvrability for this now popular concept, especially in port, thereby contributing to the claimed advantages of the system. To control the power and revolutions of the CP propeller and the pod

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
 simultaneously, a 'CRP Controller’ has been developed.
This regulates the load balance of the propellers to optimise propulsion performance and can be operated from the bridge or engine control room consoles by a single lever. A feature of the CRP Azipod installation is that the two components can be operated independently in port or in some emergencies.

A total of 820 passengers can be carried on
Hamanasu, utilising four suites, 40 de-luxe cabins, and dormitory cabins on decks 4, 5, and 6. Public rooms provided include a restaurant, grill, cafe and cafe- terrace, with conference facilities, forward saloons, children's toom, and a public bath and sauna arranged on deck 4. Lifesaving equipment includes 37 x 25- person liferafts and two MES vertical chutes.

Vehicles ate carried on three decks, with two accommodating trailers and trucks, and one available for cats. Total lane length is 2300m, and nominal capacity is 158 trailers and 65 cars. Access is arranged directly over the stern to deck 2, using a 7.5m x 6.0m wide ramp, supplemented by a twin stern-quarter ramp 16.5m long x 6.5m wide to the same deck. Two stern side-shell doors ate fitted at deck 3 level and a fixed ramp connects with deck 1. An internal turntable is fitted on deck 3.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa.... bees
Length, bp....
Breadth, moulded ...
Depth, moulded to main deck (No 2) to upper deck (No 4)....
Draught design scantling .
Gross
Japanese....
International
Deadweight design scantling..
Speed, service at 90% MCR.
Bunkers heavy oil.. diesel oil..
Water ballast.
Fuel consumption propulsion plant.
Classification ....
 ...5824dwt
 .6649dwt
 193tonnes/day
Japanese Government, non-international (Greater Coastal Service)

Roll stabilisation equipment ............. Mitsubishi fin stabilisers
Main propeller drive
Main engines
Design... _Wartsila
 .. 12V46C ..Wartsila ue

FO
«2X 12,600kW/500rev/min

Gearbox
Make.. Niigata Converter Co (NICO)
Type... -Twin input/single output
Number.. 1
Propeller
Material nickel-aluminium-bronze
Designer/manufacturer .. Kawasaki

Number..

Azipod drive
Azipod
Design
Propeller material .
Numbe
Pitch...
Diesel-driven alternators (also for general service electrical power)

Engine make/type.

Type Of fUel ....:c.sscisssssssarscessons asa cesses cernexanes epenasenaes
Output/speed .2 x 12,600kW/514rev/min
Alternator Make/typ@....... cece ese ereteeerereee AB
Output/speed .2 x 12,200kW/514rev/min

Diesel-driven auxiliary alternator 1

Engine make/type ..Daihatsu/8DK32C
Type Of FUCL ccc cee ee eseseeneteteteeteeeeeseeeeneeeneees HFO
Output/speed.. 2910kW/720rev/min
Alternator make/type iss scsccvsssosersssssavenssscovsenens eonenssvenees AB
Output/speed
Boiler
Number.
Type..
Make .
Output...
Mooring equipment
NUMDEP oo. eee eeeeeeeeeee 2 x mooring winch/windlass 7 x mooring winch
Make.. Fukushima
Type.. Electric-hydraulic
Lifesaving equipment
Number/type .37 x 25-person liferafts
Make........05 .Fujikura
MES SYStEMS oo. eee cesceetecesseesesssesesetetsesssenenesenenee
Type Vertical with liferafts
Vehicles
Number of vehicle decks............5 3 (2 for trailers/trucks;
 1 for cars)

Total lane length..
Total vehicles
Doors, ramps
 158 trailers/65 cars

Number/type ... wo X stern ramp
 stern side ramps
 2x stern side doors
 1 x fixed ramp to deck 1
 1 x turntable

DOSIQNED oo. eecseeceeteseesesteststeseetesestesesneneeneseeneneenenes Kyoritsu
Complement

Number of cabins..
Percentage outboard.
Bow thrusters

Output...
Bridge control system .
Fire detection system
Make.
Type...
Fire extinguishing system
Engineroom..

Fire foam/Hi-fog

Kashiwa/Nohmi
 19 March 2003 .17 January 2004 25 June 2004

Integrated bridge..
Contract date.
Launch/float-o
Delivery date
 61
HIGH ENDEAVOUR:

Italian owner selects
 a popular STX tanker design

Shipbuilder:......

Vessel's name:

Hull number:.....

Owner/operator: oo. reece d'Amico Soc di Navigazione SpA, Italy

Designer:.......... STX Shipbuilding Co Ltd, Korea

Model tank test establishment used......... KRISO (Korea Research Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering), Korea

FLOQ! ce eeeeceeeeeteceseeeeeeseeeceeetsesecseeesssenesieeas Liberia
Total number of sister
 ships already completed)... 1
Total number of sister

Ships Still ON OFder: oo... eee ec cece eeeteteeneees 2

UROPEAN owners, particularly, have shown
 special interest in the MR class of product tanker which STX inherited from Daedong; the builder has re- named it the Advanced 47K Tanker, and it was an
Italian operator who took delivery of High Endeavour in
September. Although this is marketed as a standard design, there are still opportunities for individual ownets to make changes to suit their own requirements, and two extra cargo tanks have been included in this version - achieved by including an extra transverse bulkhead to split the basis No 5 (P&S) tank to form an additional, centrally divided compartment.

The vessel is single-decked with forecastle, and has a double-skin hull which is divided into seven pairs of cargo tanks by an arrangement of seven transverse (and one centreline) corrugated bulkheads built up on stools.
Two slop tanks and a residuals tank, together with a heavy fuel bunker, are positioned between the engineroom and the cargo space. With all stiffening arranged outside of the tanks, a flush internal surface is provided which is coated with 300microns of Sigma phenolic epoxy. The side and double-bottom tanks in the double-hull space are used for water ballast and protected by a light-coloured tar-free epoxy.

Frank Mohn (Framo) hydraulically driven submerged pumps are fitted to handle the cargo, with the 10 largest spaces utilising 600m*/h units, and the four smaller worked by similar 300m°‘/h versions. Nine cargo segregations can be dealt with by the piping system, which is designed to carry crude oil, oil products, and
IMO Types II and II chemicals. In all, over 330 commodities, including sodium hydroxide solution can be loaded. Two more 300m°*/h pumps serve the slop tanks, and a single 100m‘/h pump is fitted in the residuals tank. Ballasting is accomplished by two conventional Frank Mohn 750m*/h hydraulic pumps, 
SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
 and each tank has an overflow line for ballast exchange which is operated on an automatic remote control valve system using a flow-through method.

Since STX Shipbuilding forms part of the Ssangyong engineering group, long established as a licensee of
MAN B&W diesel engines, this company was quite naturally selected by its new subsidiary as principal supplier of main engines for its products; indeed, these engines are now being marketed under the STX brand name. The choice for this 47K ship design has fallen on the MAN B&W 6S50MC-C Mk7 type, developing 9480kW at 127rev/min MCR, and running at 8058kW (120.3rev/min) to drive a FP propeller at a service speed of 15knots, allowing a 15% sea margin.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length. oa: . we
Length, bp..
Breadth, moulded .
Depth, moulded

Width of double skin
 design
 scantling
Gross
Deadweight
 design...
 scantling
Speed, service (85% MCR).
Cargo capacity
 liquid volume ...
Bunkers

Water ballast.
Fuel consumption main engine only .
AUXINIALIOS oo. ececcceccececceeseseseteteteeseseteneneteeeeneed 4.00m*/day
Classification .. .Bureau Veritas | + Mach Oil Tanker ESP, Chemical Tanker ESP, Unrestricted Navigation, + VeriSTAR-Hull, +AUT-UMS, +AUT-PORT, MON-SHAFT, CLEAN-AIR, ALP, INWATER
SURVEY, SPM, VCS, CARGOCONTROL, MANOVR
Percentage of high-tensile steel
USEC IN CONSEFUCTION oo... eeeecee eect reeset eseeeteeeeeneeee 24.80%
Main engine
Design ...
Model....
Manufacturer
Number .
Output...
Propeller
Materiel ise cxes ces cxcecensvacnvwnas one census
 32.65tonnes/day

Designer/manufacturer ... ..STX/Hyundai

Engine make/type STX-MAN B&W Holeby 6L23/30H

Output/speed 3 x 740kW/720rev/min
Boilers

Number.. .1 x oil fired; 1 x composite

MaKe sssssssvscasscssaraavscacsavsccsaventess coven ovesows vesesss assess a KangRim

Output. 1 x 18,000kg/h; 1 x 1200kg/h
Mooring equipmen
NUMDET oo. eeeeeeeceeeeteeeteteteeeees 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 4 x mooring winch -hydraulic

Cargo tanks
Number ..
Cargo pumps
Type...
Make...
 ..14 plus 2 x slop; 1 x residuals
 .. Submerged hydraulic

Cargo/ballast control systems
Make... Danfoss
 ..Hydraulic: mimic diagram
 welt 14
Special rudder... ..Becker flap design
Bow thruster
 .... Kawasaki

Bridge control system
Make... STX/HKM
 -AC-4/SSV/ETS/DGSE/OPU

One man operation ..
Fire detection system
Make

Fire extinguishing system
Cargo deck
Make....
Engineroom, paint store ..
 .Fixed foam -NK Co

Waste disposal plant

Incinerator
Make.. .... Kay Lindegaard
Model. SH-20SR/SM
Sewage plant
Make DVZ-Services
 .«.DVZ-SKA-20

Model
Contract date ..
Launch/float-out date
Delivery date
 63
HIGH
 controlled main engine

Shipbuilder: .. ..Naikai Zosen Corp, Japan

Vessel'S NAME? ....ccccccecee ... High Power

Hull number

Owner/operator: ......Golden Product Tanker SA, Panama

DeSIQNef: ..... cece Naikai Zosen Corp, Japan

Model test establishment

FrlQG seer eae, ot ede eect

Total number of sister ships still on order: ......
 6 ie significance of High Pover lies principally with its main engine. Basically just another example of the well-tried MAN B&W 6S50C design, this particular unit, however, enters service as Japan's first electronically controlled engine of the MAN B&W type, and features what is claimed to be the world's most advanced technology for powering large ships, including improved gas emissions, and reduced fuel and lubricating oil consumption. Electronically controlled engines are becoming increasingly popular in the marine field today.

Hitachi Zosen Diesel & Engineering Corp (HZD&E), an affiliate of the Hitachi Zosen group, built this innovative engine which is distinguished from previous S50C designs by the inclusion of the letter 'E' in its designation: 'SS0ME-C', denoting electronic control. Principal characteristics of the modifications incorporated in this model include the claim that because fuel injection and exhaust timing can be changed during operation, optimal adjustment matching load condition is possible, allowing the engine to achieve NOx reduction, smokeless operation, fuel cost reduction, and improvements in reversing and quick stopping performance. Better low-load performance is also obtainable since even in that condition high injection pressures are possible.

Other features of note ate the inclusion of an accurate timing control system which is arranged to match the operating environment, and allows the overhaul intervals for combustion components to be extended, whilst higher governing precision ensures stable operation, even when the minimum engine speed is lowered to 11% MCR. In addition, the replacement of mechanical parts by electronically controlled items reduces the potential for deterioration and damage.
Alongside development of the electronic control aspects of this 6S50 ME-C derivative, HZD&E has installed monitoring systems aimed at detecting signs of engine trouble and taking appropriate preventative measures, and coping with changes in the operating environment.

High Power is a flush-decked, double-hull tanker suitable for the carriage of refined products, crude oil
 66
 and palm oil in a catgo space divided into six pairs of tanks, plus two slop tanks, by a centreline, and transverse bulkheads. Cargo handling uses four electric pumps of 800m°*/h and 300m°/h capacity, and four gtades of cargo can be carried simultaneously. Pure epoxy coatings are employed in the tanks, and cargo and ballast operations are remotely controlled from the cargo control toom.

The Hitachi-MAN B&W 6S50ME-C main engine described above has an MCR of 9480kW at 127rev/min, and an NCR of 8530kW when running at 123rev/min. It is directly coupled to a FP propeller to give a service speed of 15.70knots. Electrical supply is derived from three Yanmar/Taiyo alternators, each producing 850kW at 900rev/min. Steam consumption is satisfied from a vertical watertube boiler with an output of 12,000kg/h. A notable inclusion in the specification is an Ocean Schilling rudder. The accommodation block is arranged aft above the machinery room, and is separated from the engine and funnel casing to minimise vibration and noise problems.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Breadth, moulded
Depth, moulded
TO MAIN COCK vee cccceceeeeesetescseseeestecsseseseseansense 19.25m
 scantling ..
Gross
Deadweight design scantling
Speed, service, 90% MCR.
Cargo capacity liquid volume
Bunkers heavy oil... diesel oil
Water ballast.
Fuel consumption main engine only auxiliaries .
Classification ..
 .37.10tonnes/day ...2.30tonnes/day ..Nippon Kaiji Kyokai NS*
 (Tanker, Oils - Flashpoint below 60°C), (ESP), MNS*

Main engine
Design .. . MAN B&W
Model... ...6S50ME-C
Manufacturer -Hitachi Zosen Diesel & Engineering Corp
Number 1

Type of fuel used.
Output
 “NCR: 8530kW/123rev/min

Propeller

Material .. Nickel-aluminium-bronze

POWER: tanker with electronically

Designer/manufacturer. Nakashima Propeller Co

Number...

Speed...
Diesel-driven alternators

Engine make/type..
Output/speed.........
Alternator make/type .
Output/speed
Boilers
Number
Type..
Make .
Output...
Mooring equipment
NUMBOMessesetcsch trices. 2 x mooring winch/windlass
Make . Nippon Pusnes
Type... ...Electro-hydraulic
Cargo tanks
Number .14, including 2 x slop tanks
Grades Of Cargo Carried... ecececestesestesteestesesseseseeseareses 4

Product range... products, crude oil, palm oil

Coated tanks .....eceseceseeeenesesstersteseetesesneseaeres pure epoxy
Cargo pumps

NUMDECS scsccssssssscenssesssnasnssstconesesereesennsveseesssessnserseneeaseseevead 4

Type... -electric, horizontal screw

MaKe woe eecccceecesesestetesesesesescseesesssesesesessscsesesseens Taiko Kikai

Capacity. 800m*/h/300m"/h
Ballast/cargo control systems

Make... -Nakakita Seisakusho

Type... Remote control
Complement

Officers .. 9

Crew... 2.

Supernum: 4

Special rudder ..Ocean Schilling
Fire detection system
Make..
Type...
Fire extinguishing system
Cargo tanks ..
 ...Nippon Hakuyo Electronics pevetsseucsevounuservesieya FF-3062-10

Engineroom ..

MaKe ooo. cceceeeeeseeeeneeeeseseteeeeeeees i
Radars

Number..

Make...
 ge sy;
Waste disposal plant
Incinerator
 ..29 October 2002 ...6 May 2004 eptember 2004

Contract date...
Launch/float-out date .
Delivery date

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
IRENE SL: Hyundai Samho delivers 319,000dwt VLCC

ShIPDUIIer: oe ereeeeees Hyundai Samho
Heavy Industries Ltd, Korea

VESSEI'S NAME! oo. ecececeetetettenenteeteenees Irene SL
HUI] NUMDES: ... cece ceecteeteececteetetseetseeseeeenees $203
Owner/Operator: ............ Enesel SA,/N S Lemos, Greece

D@SIQNED: oo. Hyundai Samho Heavy

Industries Ltd, Korea

Model test establishment used)... Hyundai Marine Research Institute, Korea
 ce
Total number of sister

Total number of sister ships still on order: wo... ee

IHE Hyundai Heavy Industries Group was founded
 in 1972, and has since expanded from a one-yatd to a two-yard operation, based on the original Ulsan site (which now includes a 'yard-within-a yard' dedicated to
VLCC construction), and the former Halla shipyard at
Samho, neat Mokpo on the country's west coast; the latter was absorbed after Halla got into serious financial difficulties. Their combined output gives tise to the claim that the group is the largest ship producer in the world, and if output from the Hyundai Mipo Dockyard is included, Hyundai shipyards contribute an amazing 20% of the world's output. Following the recent re- organisation, it is from the Samho yard, now trading independently within the group, that Irene SL has been delivered into a fleet controlled by one of Greece's oldest shipping families.

This vessel is single-decked with a sunken aft deck, but without a forecastle, and is constructed with a double skin 3.54m wide at the sides and 3.0m deep at the bottom dedicated to water ballast. Fifteen cargo tanks are formed within the hull from a combination of two longitudinal, and four transverse bulkheads, all of troughed construction. As with most vessels of this type and size, a sloping bilge is arranged in the five port and starboard wing tanks. Framing within the double hull space is arranged longitudinally, and the cargo tanks ate protected by Sigma TCN 300 coatings.

Irene SL can catty three grades of cargo simultaneously, handled by three steam-turbine-driven pumps, each delivering 5000m°/h and housed in a room at the forward end of the engineroom. Cargo and ballast control and monitoring systems are computerised and cover operation of pumps, valves, ullage measurement, and inert-gas facilities. Radar-beam level gauges are fitted, and an electro-pneumatic method of sounding is used in the ballast tanks. Crude oil washing facilities are incorporated utilising a 3000m’/pump fitted in the pumproom.

The design of this Hyundai-Samho VLCC is based very closely upon similar vessels produced under the
 70
 parent Hyundai name, however, Irene SL does differ from some of those deliveries by having an alternative machinery installation. On this occasion, Hyundai
Heavy Industries has supplied a MAN B&W 6S90MC-
C main engine with an MCR output of 29,340kW at 76rev/min, allowing a service speed of 15.70knots to be developed from the FP propeller at 85% of this power.

Another change sees the deletion of the shaft-driven alternator, with electrical supply derived solely from diesel-driven sets: in this case, three Hyundai 1180kW units. To conform with recently applied environmental issues, an inert-gas scrubber system with a capacity of 18,501m*-24,000m%, is fitted to the exhaust gas uptake of the auxiliary boilers.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa....
Length, bp....
Breadth, moulded
Depth, Moulded occ ceeeeseseseteneeeeseeneeeeaes 30.40m
Width of double skin
 bottom.
Draught design
 scantling . ..22.50m
Gross......... ..161,175gt
Displacement ..362,905tonnes
Lightweight ....43,658tonnes
Deadweight
 design 292,205dwt
 scantling.. 319,247dwt
Block coefficie esign) . +0.8132
Speed, service (85% MCR)... .15.70knots
Cargo capacity

HiQUId VOIUME.... 0. cee eee teeeteeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee .353,328m?
Bunkers
 heavy oil.. ..9898m*
 diesel oil.. 395m?
Water ballast..... .104,041m*

Percentage of segregated ballast... ..100%
Fuel consumption main engine only

Classification
 ...104.70tonnes/day ..Det Norske Veritas +A1, Tanker for oil ESP, Nauticus, (Newbuilding), EO, VCS-2, TMON, SPM

Percentage of high-tensile

Steelitised IN. cONStNUCHION sisinisiscarssssserovonoton ugseytin oosaves 36%
Main engine
Design . «MAN B&W
Model ... ....6S9OMC-C
Manufacturer... .Hyundai Heavy Industries
WUD OP ssc is cxenennanonreonengs cevvagsass dtaseonmnstnedexs tet itessconseurn 1
Type Of fUCl eee ceeeeeee senses HFO/MDO
Output ..29,340kW/76rev/min
Propeller
Material ...Nickel-aluminium-bronze
Designer/manufacturer . .Hyundai Heavy Industries
NUMDED 0... cece cece eseseeseneseseseseecseseseenaneaeseesssseseseesseeseneee 1
Pitch ..... «Fixed
Diameter .. 10,000mm
Speed... 76rev/min

Main engine-driven alternators ........ccceceeseeeereeeeneeees Nil
Diesel-driven alternators

Engine make ..
Type of fuel.

Output/speed.. .3 x 1250kW/750rev/min

Alternator make.. Hyundai

Output/SPCOd ..... ee cececeeeceeeeeeeteteeee 3 1180kW/720rev/min
Exhaust-gas scrubbing equipment

Manufacturer . Kashiwa Co Ltd
 8501m*-24,000m*/h; Nos 1 and 2 auxiliary boiler exhaust-gas uptake

Automatic, forced draught, 
HFO burning
 .Mitsubishi Heavy Industries

Output.. 2 x 45,000kg/h
Mooring equipment

NUMDET ue eeeeeeeeeeeeeees 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 6 x mooring winch

Make. ...Fukushima

Type .. Electric

Cargo tanks
Number.... 15 + 2 slop tanks

Grades of Cargo Carried... eects neteeneeeeee crude oil
Coated tanks
Cargo pumps

Capacity .3 x 5000m/h
Cargo/ballast control system
Make.
Type...
Complement
Officers.
Crew..
Suez/repair crew.
Bridge control system
Make
One man operation
Fire detection system
Make..
Type ..
Fire extinguishing systems
Engineroom..
 ..Danfoss Marine Systems .. Hydraulic remote control

Expansion and local foam
Kashiwa Co Ltd
Radar
Number .
Make..
Model....
Waste disposal p
Incinerator
Make....
Model..
Waste disposer
Make...
Model ..
Sewage plant
Make ...
Model ..
Contract date .
Launch/float-out date
Delivery date......

Japan Radio Co
» JMA-9932-SA; JMA-9922-6XA
 . . MAX! 1200SL WSM
 -Electrolux
 18 December 2002 coop 19 July 2004 sue 12 October 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
KIISLA:
 products tanker

Shipbuilder:....... Estaleiros Navais de Viana do Castelo SA (ENVC), Portugal
Kiisla

Hull number:
Owner/operator:

Designers: ....ENVC, Portugal/Deltamarin, Finland
Model test establishment

USC? veceeccceecceeeeeeesneeeesnseeeeesesees HSVA, Germany
Flag: .... Finland
Total number of sister ships
 already completed:..
Total number of sister

Ships Still ON OFCOP oo. eee eeteee eee eeeeeenee 2

EADERS of Significant Ships might recall previous eviews of newbuildings delivered into the service of
Finnish operator Fortum, the national oil major formerly known as Neste. The most recent of these appeared last year and featured the innovative double-acting tankers
Mastera and Tempera, designed to serve the Northern Sea
Route across Russia.

Alongside these specialist vessels, the company is in the process of adding more conventional tankers to its fleet in the shape of a 25,000dwt contract placed with the Jinling shipyard, People's Republic of China, and the subject vessel of 14,000dwt, delivered from the Viana do Castelo shipyard in Portugal.

Both designs have involved Finnish consultancy
Deltamarin in aspects of the design: in the case of
ENVC, this included the supply of steelwork drawings covering the cargo area, produced in accordance with the requirements of Det Norske Veritas and especially conforming with its '1A Super’ notation for navigation in ice, necessitating specific consideration of hull form, structure and the propulsion system. Kiis/a is a single- decked vessel with forecastle and poop, upon which is built a four-tier superstructure providing accommodation for 14 personnel and 4 supernumaries. A cofferdam separates these decks from a wheelhouse offering virtual all-round vision.

The hull is double-skinned and surrounds a space divided by a centreline, and transverse bulkheads, into seven paits of cargo tanks. Nos 4 and 5 tanks P&S are smaller than the remainder, whilst the Nos 7 P&S compartments are arranged to also serve as slop tanks.
The use of troughed construction for the bulkheads, and the inclusion of side stiffening within the double hull and deck beams mounted externally, ensures a plain surface within the tanks which are protected by MarineLine coatings.

The cargo systems ate suitable for products of specific gravities between 0.66 and 1.54tonnes/m* and of a temperature range between -20°C and +80°C. Stainless steel piping of AISI grade 316 is used and cargo handling is by means of 14 Hamworthy deepwell pumps.

Kiisiais fitted with an 8-cylinder Wartsila main engine of the 8L46C type, with an MCR output of 8400kW at 500rev/min. This drives a CP stainless steel propeller through a Renk gearbox for a service speed of 15.3knots at 85% MCR, with a sea margin allowance of 15%. An A

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004

Van Kaick 1500kVA shaft-driven alternator is installed, and there ate three diesel-driven alternators fitted: two of 1284kVA and one of 851kVA. Two boilers with an output of 10tonnes each provide steam. A Rolls-Royce bow thruster with an output of 800kW is also provided.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa...
Length, bp.. we
Breadth, MOUIDE..... cee esneeeessessrseeeessereneee 21.70m
Depth, moulded to main deck 12.15m
 to poop deck....
Width of double skin (minimum) side... bottom
Draught design... scantling
Gross
Displacement.
Lightweight ....
Deadweight design
 14,000dwt
 scantling....... .14,750dwt
Block COePICIONE 0... eee ee eeeseseetetesestsestesesestsseneneaseneneed 0.761
Speed, service, 85% MCR, 15% sea margin 15.30knots
Cargo capacity

HQUID VOIUMC 0... eecececeeeeesesnesrseeteseeseseeseeneneesees 16,082m?
Bunkers
 heavy oil... 788
 diesel oil ...

Water ballast
Percentage segregated ballast...
Fuel consumption
 main engine. we auxiliaries ..... ... 12tonnes/day
Classification.............. Det Norske Veritas 1A1, Tanker for Oil, 
Chemicals,ESP, ICE 1A, EO, + NAUT-AW, VCS-2, ETC, HLI.54
Percentage of high-tensile
 steel USEd IN CONSHUCHION sss sis ccsesass voveesasesenssursesonunvenseonnes 38%
Main engine
Design...
Model....
Manufacturer
Number.
Output...

Gearbox

Output/speed. 400kW/-
Propeller

Material occ esseeseseseessseseeseeneenene Stainless steel

Designer/manufacturer ..

Number.

Pitch...

Speed...
Main-engine driven alternator
INUIMBOliseers exxconns core semewer csconcernrennesses exennasiens ase sane nex sense ane coven 1
 14,000dwt ice-strengthened

Output/speed
Diesel-driven alternators

NUDED... .secscneneestantascnsstsssaseanssnsmassaassveconetavssrventanaeseeses

Engine make .

Number/type..

Type of fuel

Output/speed
 .2 x 6L20; 1 x 4L20 .MDO 2 x 1020kW/900rev/min;
 1 x 680kW/900rev/min
A Van Kaick

Alternator make.
Output/speed ...
 2 x 1284kVA/900rev/min 1 x 851kVA/900rev/min

Boilers
Number..
Type ...
Make...
Output

Mooring equipment
Number/type .
 .Rolls-Royce
TYPE ns ccccsescrsseesesesssoesssbannenied sansa sssssres ae arbasina astasees is ea Electric
Cargo tanks
Number.
Grades of cargo carried..
Type of coating
 12 plus 2 cargo/slop ..oil products/chemicals .. Advanced Polymer Coatings, 
Marineline

Stainless Stel ss: ssscsssiessusesersesasoseveraseseneneneses AISI 316 piping
Cargo pumps

TYP@ oi eseeseesteseseesessrsseeseseeseesseneseeseeeeeees Electric submersible

NUMDbeEr 0... eee 12 x DL150 d/200; 2 x DL100 d/100;
 1 DL80 d/100 (cargo drain tank)
 ..Hamworthy

Capacities.. 12 x 350m# /h; 2 x 150m*%/h; 1 x 50m%/h

Cargo/ballast control systeM.........ce Napa/Saab/Valmarine

Complement
OFFICERS: s sassszesccvescesneansonseonrinrenamnenes cornnnnene Eoteennenetasneoueasenesenes 7

Supernumaries..
Bow thruster

One man operation ..
Fire detection system

MaKG nc usissiciasiss ssavesaves cas savess .Autronica
TYDC ose eeceseeeeeresesestesteseesssessssesseesssisseesssneseeseae BS-100 DYFI
Fire extinguishing system

Cargo deck

Radars
Number...

Launch/float-out date .
Delivery date
MARY ARCTICA: box ship for Greenland

Shipbuilder: oc. Gdansk Shiprepair Yard ‘REMONTOWA'
 (hull built at Gdansk Shipyard), 
Poland

Vessel's name: .Mary Arctica

Hull NUMER oo... eteeteeeteteeteeteeteeeeneees 1104
Owner/operator: ... Royal Arctic Line, Greenland

DeSIQNEF: .... eee Gdansk Shiprepair Yard, ‘REMONTOWA'

Poland/Carl Bro A/S, Denmark
Model test establishment
 used: Force Technology, Denmark
Flag: ....... te Denmark (DIS)
Total number of s ships already completed)... Nil
Total number of sister
Ships Still ON Oder oo... ccceceseeteseteeeeees Nil

REENLAND's trading requirements include ships for both overseas links, and coastal feeder services, as evidenced by two specialist vessels described in previous editions of Significant Ships. From 1994 came Sea Arctica, designed to operate on the mainly containerised route to Denmark, with the smaller Irena Arctica a delivered in 1995 to maintain a feeder run along the west coast of the island, northwards from the capital Nuuk. Joining the fleet in 2004 is Mary Arctica, the largest ship yet built by
Remontowa; she will go into service between ports in
Northern Europe and various harbours in Greenland.
The general arrangement plan shows the vessel's interesting profile, with the aft-end lines forming a ‘pram-shape' complete with a central skeg, and the fore end almost replicating the shape with a spoon-type bow, designed to enable the vessel to perform an icebreaking function by sliding on to the ice and crushing it under its weight. Construction, under the highest ice-class notation (ICE 1A*) of Det Norske Veritas, means that as well as the ice belt along the ship's side, Mary Arctica has shell plating forward which is up to 30mm thick and a 50mm stem plate. Additionally, an ice-knife is fitted above the rudder and ice-fins in front of the propeller.
The design includes a double-skin hull extending into the engineroom, and surrounding a cargo space containing four box-shaped holds, fitted with cell guides and suitable for the carriage of 259TEU, with a further 313 loaded on the upper deck and on hatch covets. A whaleback forward affords protection to mooring arrangements and deck cargo. The double-hull space is given over to water ballast, with fuel capacity provided in deeptanks between the hold bulkheads. With much of its cargo bound for small Greenland harbours, Mary
Arctica is self-sustaining, with two 45tonne Liebherr ctanes positioned on tall pedestals on the centreline.
The main engine is a Cegielski- MAN B&W 6S46MC-
C type having an MCR tating of 7860kW at 129rev/min and driving a CP propeller. Service speed at 90% MCR is 15.30knots, allowing a 15% sea margin

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
 and assuming 1000kW diverted to a shaft-driven alternator via a Renk gearbox. Also fitted are three
MAN B&W Holeby/Leroy Somer diesel-alternator sets: two producing 735kW and one 645kW. One exhaust-gas and one oil-fired boiler provide steam, and the main engine is fitted with an exhaust- gas scrubbing system. An 800kW tunnel thruster at bow and stern, and a Schilling-type rudder supplied by Becker Marine and operated by two Rolls-Royce Tenfjord rotary-vane steering gears, provide the extra manoeuvrability required for working in Greenland's small harbours.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length. oa...
Length, bp...
Breadth, moulded ..
Depth, moulded to main deck. to tween deck...
Width of double skin side bottom.
Draught design scantling . max conta

Displacement ..
Lightweight
Deadweight design scantling..
Block coefficient..
Speed, service, 90% MCR, 15% sea margin, 1000kW shaft alternator engaged ou... eee 15.30knots
Cargo capacity
 6365dwt .8870dwt sessed 0.704
 heavy oil .
 diesel oil..
Water ballast.
Container operations
 water ballast carried when loaded...
Fuel consumption
 main engine...
 ....31tonnes/day auxiliaries ... ..3tonnes/day
Classification .....Det Norske Veritas +1A1, ICE-1A*, General
Cargo/Container Carrier, EO, ICS, DG-P, In Water Survey
Percentage of high-tensile
 steel USE in CONSTUCTION ....... cc eecetes cence reteeneneees ~30%
Heel control equipment............ 300m* tank with 480m* pump
Main engine
Design .... MAN B&W
Model ...... ...6S46MC-C
Manufacturer .. H Cegielski)
NUMDE? 0... ceeeeeeeseeeecteseneteneseeseseseeeeeneneneeeesereeeentees 1
Type of fuel used H 7860kW/129rev/min
Gearbox
Make... ..Renk
Model

Number...

Output speed (to shaft alternator).
Propeller

Matte tlall:. cos cssseesessacvs ses nvescans rea visesarascasaas cases Stainless steel

Designer.. .MAN B&W Alpha
 ..5100mm

Diameter . : .129rev/min

Main engine-driven alternator

Number... 1
Make/type ..Leroy Somer/LSA 53VS7/6p
Output/speed. 1600kW/1200rev/min

Diesel-driven alternators

Engine make/type. . MAN B&W Holeby/2 x 8.16/24;
 1 x 5L16/24

Output/Speed ou... eee 2 x 1088kW/1200rev/min; 1 x 680kW/1200rev/min

Alternator make/type.... ...Leroy Somer/AEM
Output/speed 760kW/1200rev/min;
 1 x 475kW/1200rev/min
Exhaust-gas scrubbing equipment
Manufacturer. Aalborg Industries

EXV 1022-28-57-900-SD

Cargo cranes
Number...
 .Liebherr .CBW 45/298
«2 x 45tonne/29.8m

NUMDE? oo. eecececeeeeeeeteeneee 2 x mooring winch/windlass;
 3 x mooring winch
Make ..Rolls-Royce yp Electric

Hatch covers

Design MacGregor

Manufacturer .. -Stocznia Gdansk

TYPO oes eeeeeeececeteeseeeeetseseseesseetensseeseseees Lift-away pontoons
Containers

Lengths

Cell guides.. Deck and holds
Total TEU Capacity... esceesesestetetsesesesteneteteeeeees 572 on deck ..... 313 in holds...... .259
 homogeneously loaded to 14tonnes .. reefer plugs
Tiers/rows (maximum) on deck..
 in holds..
Ballast control system
 ...Lyngs@ Marine

Officers..
 7
Schilling

Rolls-Royce Kamewa ; 1 x bow. Tunnel type 2 x 800kW

MAK Gis nscesss exvesesnag cosvarserssancensusareF8 ten Sdaesaenesneeseeees Autronica
Fire extinguishing system
Cargo holds. «CO, 
Make......... .Unitor
Engineroom.. .CO,/Local water mist
Make......... ..Unitor/Semco
 ..26 June 2003
Launch/float-out date .3 September 2004
Delivery date. End-2004
Note: Although scheduled for end-2004 completion, delivery might extend into 2005.

Contract date .
 75
METHANE KARI-ELIN: Samsung-built LNG
 carrier

Shipbuilder: ..
 .. Samsung Heavy Industries
Co Ltd, Korea

Vessel's name: ... ....Methane Kari-Elin

Hull NUMBER: oo. ceceeetceteeteteteeeteeteeeeeesee 1428
Owner/operator: . ....BG LNG services, USA
Designer:.....Samsung Heavy Industries Co Ltd, Korea
FLAGS As! ratons sector Mas reunite eeteussezsntne TS Bermuda
Total number of sister ships already in Service: oo... ececeeeeee Nil
Total number of sister
SHIPS Still ON OPEL: oo. e cece eeeeecsetteeteeteeteeees Nil

AMSUNG'S fitst venture into the world of LNG
 transportation occutred as recently as 1999, since when orders received by the yard for the special type of tanker required for this cargo have reached well into double-figures. With a capacity of around 138,000m’, Methane Kari-Elin represents a size of vessel which, by general consensus, has become something of a 'norm' for builders and operators worldwide, and for which
Samsung has developed a standard design used for most of the LNG carriers produced at the Koje Island shipyard in the past five years. It features a single- decked hull with aft sunken deck, raked stem with bulbous bow, transom stern, and accommodation spaces positioned aft, above the machinery space.

The double-skin hull has side spaces joined with top and bottom wing tanks arranged to carry water ballast, and encloses four individual cargo tanks separated by cofferdams and extending above the upper deck, where they are enclosed in a fore and aft trunk which includes access passages linking the extremities of the vessel.
The space forward of Nol tank is divided into three tanks: at the centre is a fuel bunker, with water ballast catried at the sides. The cargo tanks have been constructed in accordance with the Gaz Transport and
Technigas (GIT) Mk III containment system for the transport of LNG cargoes at cryogenic temperature (-163°C) and atmospheric pressure. These are enclosed in a ptimary membrane of 1.2mm thick corrugated
SUS304L stainless steel plates, and a secondary membrane of triplex glass wool. Further insulation is provided by 270mm-thick reinforced polyurethane foam contained in plywood boxes. The system is designed to limit the daily boil-off gas rate to 0.15% of total cargo volume.

Cargo is handled by two 1700m°/h electrically driven submersible cargo pumps in each tank (a total of eight), capable of completely discharging cargo in 12 houts, following cooling by LNG spray. Other equipment involved with these procedures include low- and high- duty compressors installed in a room on the trunk deck, four spray pumps, an emergency cargo pump, warm-up heaters, an LNG vaporiser, forcing vaporiset, also inert gas and nitrogen generators. An airconditioned cargo control room provides a central command and monitoring station for cargo and ballast operations, using a Kongsberg Simrad system, while propulsion
 78
 plant, integrated automation equipment and shipboard management systems can be remotely operated from the engine control room. Also installed is a one-man bridge system complying with Lloyd's NAV1/IBS notations, and part of a Kongsberg Norcontrol DB10 installation.

Although Samsung has very recently secured its first contract for diesel-powered LNG tankers, Methane
Karin-Efin continues to utilise the well-proven steam turbine-driven concept, based on a Kawasaki cross- compound impulse-type UA-400 unit developing 39,500shp (29,044kW). This is supplied with steam from boilers arranged to burn oil or boil-off gas. An integral gearbox reduces turbine speed to 90rev/min at the FP propeller to give a service speed at 85% maximum output of 20.10knots. Electrical requirements are derived from two steam turbine-driven alternators and a diesel-driven set.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa... .278,80Mm
Length, bp....
Breadth, moulded
Depth, moulded to main deck.. to trunk deck..
Width of double skin side bottom..
Draught design... scantling .
Gross
Deadweight design scantling..
Block coefficient.
Speed, service, 85%
Cargo capacity
ViQUId VOIUME oo. tecetetesesesnetenesteteeeeeeseeeeees
Bunkers heavy oil.. diesel oil..
Water ballast.
Fuel consumption ..171.7tonnes/day
Classification ........ Lloyd's Register +LMC, NAV1, IBS, UMS, CCS, SCM, CS, ICS, IWS, PMS (CM), SCM.
Also DNV F-AMC, Letter of Compliance

Design Type UA-400 cross-compound impulse
Manufacture .. Kawasaki Heavy Industries
INUIMD EL, Betis... ioacoonoeslecuetegsivasseldedsceasansettovesgl edelesenrendoene 1
 9,500shp (29,044kW)
 ..Kawasaki Heavy Industries

Type.. -Integrated with main turbine

NUIMDOMS sisciceescassh istsiavasncrvosascosepnadessaeotagnasastsdesnnteeedeievegs 1

Output speed 90rev/min
Propeller

Material ..Nickel-aluminium-bronze

Designer/manufacturer . .Hyundai Heavy Industries

Diameter ..
Speed...
Steam turbine-driven alternators
Number...

Turbine make/type . Mitsubishi/AT42CT-B

Output/speed..... 2 x 3450kW/1800rev/min
Alternator make/tyPe.........cceeeeeee ABB/AMG 630M4L
Output/speed ..38450kW/1800rev/min

Diesel-driven alternator

Engine make/type.. Wartsila/9R32LNE

Output/speed..... -1 x 3647kW/720rev/min

Alternator make/typ BB/AMG 900SM 10LSEA

Output/speed 3450kW/720rev/min
Boilers

Number

Type ..

Make awasaki Heavy Industries

OUT OUI eee ys. Loe amt octrsger che eS 2 x 65tonnes/h
Mooring equipment

NUMDET occ cette reece 2.x mooring winch/windlass;
 7 x mooring winch

Make/tyPe..... cece Kocks/high-pressure hydraulic
Cargo tanks

Number

Grades of cargo carried
Product range.
Tank system ....
Stainless steel.

Primary barrier;
 pump tower, liquid piping

Cargo pumps
Number
Type ..
Make..
Capacity

Ballast/cargo control
Make..
Type...

Complement
Officers.

Eb 8 x 1700m*/h
 .Kongsberg Simrad

Suez/repair crew
Bow thruster .. Kawasaki Heavy Industries 1X 2500kW
Bridge control system
Make .
Type..
One man operation
Fire detection system
Make .
Type...
Fire extinguishing system
Cargo tanks .
Make
Engineroom.
Make
Radars
Number.

Kongsberg Norcontrol
DB-10 we YOS

Consilium Marine
CS-3000
 ..Kongsberg Norcontrol
DB-10

Make
Model.
Waste disposal plant
Waste compactor

Make ... .Hackman Metos
Mode... Orwak 5030
Waste shredder/crusher
Make ... .... Hackman Metos
Model... . UMS 2530
Contract date. July 2001
Launch/float-out date June 2003
Delivery date... .May 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
MINERVA LISA: Samsung 105,000dwt standard tanker

Shipbuilder: ............. Samsung Heavy Industries
Co Ltd, Korea

Vessel's name: ..... Minerva Lisa

Owner/operator: ..........6 Minerva Maritime Inc, Greece

Designer:.....Samsung Heavy Industries Co Ltd, Korea

FAG) septic BN sennathies angen ESE SE cans nsecnbneees Greece

Total number of sister

Total number of sister ships still on order: ........

RING together an owner with a fair representation
 of 105,000dwt tankers in his fleet, and a builder with a standard design of that size in its portfolio, and a mini-series of four newbuildings might well be the result. Minerva Lisa is the last delivery from such a group, and is particularly noteworthy for the inclusion in the specification of the requirements of ABS Ice
Class C notation, and of the adoption of a -10°C ambient temperature basis for her design - indicative of
Minerva's possible interest in an increase in Baltic trading resulting from an anticipated expansion of
Russian oil exports.

The vessel is single-decked without forecastle, and arranged with a double skin which combines side and bottom tanks to form six pairs of water ballast tanks, and surrounds a catgo space, also divided into six paits of tanks and used for the carriage of crude oil and dirty products. Two slop tanks are also provided, like the catgo tanks protected by Hempadur epoxy anti-abrasive coatings. Cargo handling is by means of three Shinko vertical, centrifugal pumps, each rated at 2800m°/h and installed in a pump room forward of the machinery space.

The latter is arranged right aft, and is the location of an MAN B&W 7S60MC main engine which develops 14,280kW MCR at 105rev/min and was built by the
HSD Engine Co Ltd. Directly coupled to a FP
Nakashima propeller, the arrangement produces a service speed of almost 15.50knots. Electrical power of 1225kVA is obtained from each of three Hyundai alternator sets using MAN B&W 6L21/31 prime movers, and steam is produced in two oil-fired
Mitsubishi boilers with an output of 26,000kg/h each.
To assist with manoeuvring and mooring, a Brunvoll
 82
 1500kW bow thruster is installed. Accommodation for a total crew of 30 is arranged in a deckhouse above the engineroom, separated from the funnel casing to reduce possible noise and vibration problems.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Length, 0a... “
Length, bp
Breadth, mou!
Depth, moulded

TO MAIN COCK 00... eecceceeceteeeeseecsteneeeeseseseeeseeeeeenenes 21.30m
Width of double skin
 sides .
 bottom....
Draught
 design....
 scantling
GOSS oe eeececeeseseeceeeeenseesesenescseaescsnscsenesseeeescseeeeresseeee
Deadweight
 design...
 scantling.
Speed, service....
Cargo capacity

WQUIGD VOIUME oo... eee eee ceeeteeetesestseenereeeeeneneees 124,400m*
Bunkers

NO AVY OIL. sscascsssassssssssasconsasshnasazsavesmsssasesissssaesscen sey 3,670m?
 diesel oil
Water ballast...
 ...93,209dwt .103,755dwt ..15.45knots
 .40,000m°

Fuel consumption main engine Only ......c cece nee 51.80tonnes/day
Classification.............. American Bureau of Shipping +A1(E), Oil Carrier ESP, +AMS, +ACCU, SH, UWILD, SHCM, Ice Class IC, RES, SPM, VEC, FL (25)

Main engine
Design ....
Model.....

Manufacturer.

Number......

Type of fuel

Output

Propeller

Material Nickel-aluminium-bronze

Designer/manufacturer -Nakashima

NUM Ol sesicept ties sas ane conse cvns osdien srs deni ves tesvansguasienextemeaensaxass 1

Pitch .... Fixed

Diameter . .7250mm -105rev/min

Engine make/type «MAN B&W 6L21/31

OUtDUE eee cee ceceeeceteeeeeseeesesereneneneeseneeeeeed 3 x 1054kW
Alternator make/type Hyundai/HFC6 564-64K-HSD
Output/speed 3 x 1225kVA/900rev/min

Boilers
Number ..
 .MAC-30B oil fired 2 x 26,000kg/h

Output.
Hose cranes

Stonnes/26m radius

Performance..
Mooring equipment
Number 8 winches

Make ...Rolls-Royce

Type .... ..Low-pressure hydraulic
Cargo tanks

NUMDE? o....eesceseseeeeeeeeee ...12 plus 2 slop tanks

Grades of cargo carrie .crude oil; dirty products

Tank coatings...Hempels Hempadur anti-abrasive epoxy
Cargo pumps
Number...
 ..vertical, single-stage centrifugal
Shinko

Capacity. .3 x 2800m*/h
Cargo/ballast control systems

Make... cece eseseeeecseeesesescsesesereenenensseseeteneeseeee Shinko
Complement

Suez/repair crew
Bow thruster

Bridge control system
Ome man Oper atiONn oo. ccceeeeeeeteeesesnsteneeeeeneteeeeee No
Fire detection system
Make...
Type
Fire extinguishing systems
Cargo deck.
Make ..........
Radars
Number ...
Make....
Models.
 x S-band JMA9833, 2 x X-band
JMA 9823/2-7XA
Integral bridge system
Make/MOdel........cccceseeceene reese JRC/JAN-701C
Waste disposal plant
Incinerator

Sewage plant
Make...

Model .
Contract date ...
Launch/float-outdate
Delivery date
 ..3 September 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
SNS

MSC STELLA: Hyundai Samho continues the HHI/MSC connection

Shi DUI! oer Hyundai Samho
Heavy Industries Co Ltd, Korea

Vessel's name: . MSC Stella

Hull number: .......

Owner/operator............. Mediterranean Shipping
Co SA, Switzerland

De@SIQNE?: ...c eects Hyundai Samho Heavy

Industries Co Ltd, Korea
Model test establishment
 (US 0 rr Hyundai Maritime

Research Institute, Korea

PAGE 2... nneeseccnennenesnsiasessesessinne ss anaes suameases Panama
Total number of sister
 ships already completed)... 6
Total number of sister

Ships still ON OFDEP: oo. ceccceeeesetteeteeteeteeees Nil

IHE association between Hyundai Heavy Industries
 (HHI) and Mediterranean Shipping has produced a number of container ships of various sizes for service in the worldwide operations of this Swiss-controlled company, and now that the HHI group has been te- organised into sepatate companies, this is being continued by Hyundai Samho Heavy Industties, and it was this yard which delivered MSC Svella in July. The vessel is, in fact, very similar to MSC Viviana, delivered last year by HHI (Significant Ships of 2003) except that
TEU capacity has been reduced from a total of 6730 to 6402, by eliminating one-tier of containers from the deck loading.

The double-skinned/single-decked design retains the girderless structure of parent Hyundai's container ship construction and has eight cargo holds, six of which are arranged forward of the engineroom and provide 26 x
TEU bays, and two aft with eight bays, plus two more (usually allotted to FEU) positioned right aft above the sunken mooring deck. A maximum of six tiers of containers is carried on deck with nine in the holds, whilst rows across ate 16 and 14 respectively.
Dangerous cargoes of SOLAS categories 1.4S/2/3/4/5.1/6.1/8 and 9 can be carried in holds 1 to 5, and these spaces are mechanically ventilated with two-hourly air changes. As well as 20ft and 40ft containers, 45ft units can be loaded direct on to hatch covets 1A, 2A, 3A, 4A, 5A., 6A, 7A, and 8A.

Cell guides suitable for 40ft containers are fitted in the cargo holds, and these can be adapted to accept six tiers of TEU. On deck, athwartship lashing bridges for 40ft/45ft containers are provided, and equipped with the necessary fittings to enable those loaded on the hatch covers ot stools to be conveniently and securely lashed up to fout, five, or six tiers high. Protection for containers carried on deck is afforded by a breakwater at the forward end of the upper deck, and the vessel
 84
 has been fitted with MacGregor pontoon hatch covers, made up of three panels each of a maximum 41tonnes weight to facilitate handling by shore cranes.

The main engine is of the Hyundai-MAN B&W 10K98MC-C type, developing 57,100kW MCR at 104rev/min, and running at an NCR 90% of that value with a 15% sea margin, for a service speed of 24.80knots. The four diesel-alternators have both mechanical and electrical parts provided by Hyundai, and ate rated at 2100kW each. The rudder profile and taked propeller tips have been adopted to reduce propeller cavitation, and the outside shell has been coated with self-polishing paint as part of a five-year life protection programme. Forward, a Lips 2500kW thruster has been fitted to enhance manoeuvrability.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa vee
Length, bp.....
Breadth, moulde
Depth, moulded
TO UPPer COCK ooo. eeeeceeeeteeereereseteteeteneeeeeenees 24.20m
Width of double skin bottom .
 scantling ..
Gross
Displacement
Lightweight...
Block coefficient design . scantling ..
Speed, service, 90% MCR, 15% sea margin
Bunkers
HO AVY Oil... ceacucccscsstonssiteeasnscanseasenseanscntssascaasaaanassia diesel oil...
Water ballast.
Water ballast carried in loaded condition
Fuel consumption main engine only ... auxiliaries .....
Classification
 ..9200tonnes
 208.70tonnes/day ceeeseneee 7.24tonnes/day .Germanischer Lloyd +100A5, Container Ship IW, +MC, AUT

Percentage of high-tensile steel used in construction ..
Heel control equipment
 ..Anti-heel pump working in

No 3 wing tanks P&S

Main engine
Design .. .-MAN B&W
Model.... -10K98MC-C
Manufacturer Hyundai Heavy Industries
Number 1
Type of fuel.. HFO and MDO
Output 57, 100kW/104rev/min

Propeller
 ..Nickel-aluminium-bronze
Hyundai Heavy Industries

Material...
Designer/manufacturer ..
Number

Hyundai-MAN B&W 8L27/38 ssicarieatastd HFO and MDO 4 x 2280kW/720rev/min

Engine make/type
Type of fuel......
Output/speed

Alternator/make/type . -Hyundai-EMD/HFJS 712-14K

Output/speed 4 x 2100kW/720rev/min
Boilers

Number . vel

Type... ..HA1O0RSGY

Make . ..KangRim

Output...
Mooring equipment

Number ....

Make.. .Rolls-Royce

Type ... Electric
Hatch covers

Designer/manufacture MacGregor

Lift-on/lift-off pontoon

Containers

Lengths.. .20ft; 40ft; 45ft

Heights.. ..8ft Gin; Oft Gin

Cell Quid oo. ccceceteseceteseeesesetetetseseeeeneeeeeeee in holds

Total TEU capacity..
 on deck .. in holds...
 homogeneously loaded to 14tonnes :
Reefer PIUGS .....ccccceceeseseceeseeeeseseteteneteesesetenseseeeeees

Tiers/rows
ON COCK ooeeeeeeeccseseteeeestesseseeesenseeeseseneneeseseeetenseseeeees 6/16
IN ROMS ssscsarscsscascresanssirmessissasimsaisaiemsissedseneed 9/14
Complement
Officers..

Crew...
Suez/repair crew..
Bow thruster

Bridge control system
Make ..
 p :
Fire detection system
Make...
Type ...
Fire extinguishing system
Cargo holds/engineroom ...
 .Heinrich Behrens Pumpen

Radars
Number 2 x X-band; 1 x S-band
MK csrnsnsnansasaonssrsnesnass ats ove nenaviones oasavavens oshavsasea vol STN-Atlas
Models 2X ARPA-2B8X; 1 x ARPA-3B-14S

Integrated bridge
Contract date
Launch/float-out date ...
Delivery date

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
NURAGHES: new ferry for Tirrenia's mainiand/Sardinia service

ShIPDUIIGer: oe eect eee Fincantieri CNI (Castellammare di Stabia yard), Italy
Vessel's name: ..Nuraghes

Hull number: ...
Owner/operator:.....Tirrenia di Navigazione, Italy
Model test establishment
 used: .. ..MARIN, The Netherlands
Flag: .....
Total number of sister

Total number of sister
Ships Still ON OFCOM: oo. ee eceeeceeeteeeteeeteetteeeee 2

TRRAGHES takes her name ftom a series of megalithic towers found throughout Sardinia, and it is to Olbia, a port on the north-east coast of that island, that this new cruise-ferry will operate a regular service from Civitavecchia, the port of Rome. She has been designed as a ro-to ship with twin rudders, bulbous bow, and transom stern. The main engines and auxiliaries are positioned aft of midships, and accommodation, public ateas, and navigation spaces located on decks 5, 6, 7 and 8.

Vehicle access is over the stern on to the main deck, and the cargo space is arranged so that the lower hold is available only for cars, with the main and upper decks for trailers. In total, three fixed decks ate used for vehicle transport, with additional space provided on hoistable platforms offering 3500m°* of stowage. Access from main to upper deck is by means of two fixed ramps, one for trailers and one for cats.

Passengers enter the ferry at the port side aft, and proceed direct to reception using an escalator.
Accommodation is provided for 2900 passengers occupying 360 cabins, arranged for two or four-bed occupancy, and with three triple-berth rooms available for disabled passengers. External cabins make up 35% of the total, with the remainder positioned inside. All ate equipped with en-suite toilet facilities. For other travellers in both first and tourist classes, there are lounges fitted out with a total of 1000 pullman seats.

Public spaces to cruise-liner standards are arranged to satisfy the full passenger complement, including restaurant and cafeteria-style eating places, sandwich and snack bars, and a lounge hall with seating for 600. A cinema can be visited and there is a shopping area, card room, video-game arcade and a quiet reading room. A ctew of 90 is employed to service the vessel. Lifesaving facilities include six 150-person lifeboats and four vertical-chute marine evacuation systems.

Nuraghes is powered by four Wartsilé 12V46C main engines, operating on heavy fuel oil and each developing engine speed to 150rev/min at the two CP propellers, and also driving a pair of 2200kW Marelli alternators.
 86

Three 2300kW Wartsilaé/ Marelli diesel-driven alternator sets ate also installed. Service speed is 29.50knots at 85% full power, and a top speed of over 31knots can be achieved (similar to that achieved on Fincantieri's earlier series for Minoan Lines - Knossos Palace, Significant Ships of 2000). Manoeuvring is enhanced by having two conventional rudders aft and two Lips-Wartsila 1500kW thrusters forward.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Length, 0a...
Length, bp...
Breadth, moulded .
Depth moulded
 to main deck....
 to upper deck..
Draught
 design...
 scantling
Gross
Deadweight
 design ....
 scantling.
Speed, service, 85% MCR.
Bunkers
 .214.00m -192.44m
 .5500dwt
 heavy oil.
 diesel oil. see
Water Dallast ies vas ceases ves savoens cratssssassenavossnsoms astavenonvavearea 3000m?
Fuel consumption

MAIN ENGINES ONY... cece cette eee 164tonnes/day

Classification....Registro Italiano Navale C* Passenger Ship, Unrestricted Navigation, AUT-UMS/AUT-Port, MON-Shaft, IWS

Percentage of high-tensile steel used in construction ....
Roll stabilisation equipment...
Main engines
Design.
Model ..
Manufacturer.
Number ..
 ..Fincantieri fins

Wartsila .12V46C ..Wartsila

Gearboxes
Make...
Model..
Number...
Output SPCC ssicsscccassssssossvscastoenansssavemsosstasscaaas 150rev/min

Propellers
Material
Designer/manufacture:
Number
 .Nickel-aluminium-bronze
Wartsila (Lips) seve iaesansrved 2

Main-engine driven alternators

Number...
Make/type Marelli
Ouitput/speed. .2 Xx 2200kW/1500rev/min

Diesel-driven alternators

Number.. 3
Engine make/type .. Wartsila 6R32
Output/speed...... .3 x 2430kW/720rev/min
Alternator make/type . Marelli-Sincrono
Output/SPeed nu... cece 3 x 2300kW/720rev/min
Boilers
Number.. 2
Type. ..CHB-3000

Make .. .. Aalborg
Output . .2 x 3000kg/h
Mooring equipment
NUMDBED oo. eecceceeeeseseeseeeeseees 2 x mooring winch/windlass 6 x mooring winches
Make .. ...Ulstein Brattvaag
TYPO weeececceseeeesesceensesesesenecseseseeeeceeseseeseseseseeeeeseee Hydraulic
Lifesaving equipment
Lifeboats. ...6 X 150-person
 .4 x vertical chute

Reefer plugs (in vehicle space)
Vehicles
Number of vehicle decks
Total lane length for trailers ..
Doors, ramps, moveable decks

Number... 2 x stern ramps; 1 x fixed internal ramp with cover; 1 x moveable deck; 3 x hoistable ramps

Type.
Complement
Passengers

Number of cabins
Percentage outboard..
Passenger seating ..

Bow thrusters
Make...
Number..

Bridge control system
Make...

Type..
Fire detection system

Drencher ....Minimax ... Sprinkler ....Minimax

Consilium Selesmar
 6 April 2003 .21 January 2004 30 June 2004

Launch/float-out date.
Delivery date

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
PALMALI VOYAGER: new-design Russian river/sea dry cargo ship

Shipbuilder: ............ Volgograd Shipyard, Russia
Vessel's name: Palmali Voyager
HUll MUMDET: oo. eect eceeceeteeeeteeeteeeeteeteeneene 222
Owner/operator:........... Palmali Shipping Co Ltd, 
Turkey

Designer: .... Marine Engineering Bureau, Russia
Model test establishment used:..

Total number of sister
Ships Still ON OFEM: oo. ee eect eee 1

PAA VOYAGER is the second delivery from a new series of river/sea dry cargo vessels, built in accotdance with the Marine Engineering Bureau's
Project 006RSD0S5. Specially designed in conjunction with Palmali Shipping for effective operation at sea, as well as in the Russian inland waterways and the Volga-
Don channel, the class highlights the healthy order book at the Volgograd shipyard, whose reputation has been built up on the construction of tanker and cargo ship designs of maximum dimensions 141.00m length and 18m beam, equating to a deadweight of around 7000tonnes. Volgograd currently operates as part of the MNP-Onshore and Offshore group, which has a total of five shipyards spread around Russia.

Russia possesses a vast mileage of inland waterways available for navigation, with some providing links between the Black Sea and the Baltic, and beyond into international waters. As a result, a particular low ait- draught configuration has evolved over many years to suit the operational conditions, and this has been retained by the designers of the 006RSD05 project, which features a single-decked, double-skin hull with poop and forecastle. Four cargo holds are arranged, and their 3.3m high hatch coamings, supporting pontoon covers strengthened and equipped to carry containers and timber cargoes, effectively form a full length trunk above the main deck, whilst leaving a passageway along the deck P & S.

A fore and aft gangway, 2.5m above this deck passage, also provides access between poop and forecastle and setves as a working platform at the hatch side.
Accommodation is arranged in the poop, and in two tiers of deckhouse above, for a complement of 14. A third tier is occupied by a totally enclosed, full-width wheelhouse.
 88

The holds are box-shaped and suitable for the transport of timber, and bulk and general cargoes, with full cargo carrying utilisation possible for stowage factors up to 1.72m’*/tonne. Dangerous goods of
IMDG codes 1, 1.48, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, and 9, and
Appendix B of the BC Code can be carried, and
 rovision is made for loading a total of 274/137TEU/FEU, divided 70/35 on deck and 204/102 in the holds. No cargo handling equipment is fitted. The hazards of working in the waterways and channels are covered by mooring facilities which include two bow anchors and a stern anchor.

This series of river/sea cargo vessels is understood to be the first of its type to be fitted with fully azimuthing propellers for propulsion and steering. Two Schottel
SRP-1010FP units with 360deg rotation are installed aft, providing the vessel with a service speed of 10.50knots.
Supplementing their manoeuvring performance is a bow thruster from the same manufacturer with an output of 230kW. Power for the propulsion units comes from a pait of Wartsila 6L20 main engines each having an output of 1120kW when running at 1000rev/min.
Electrical power comes from two Volvo Penta 211kW diesel-driven alternators.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Breadth, moulded .
Depth, moulded to main deck.
Air draught, above 3.00m draught .
Draught river . sea...
Deadweight

Cargo deadweight river... sea...

Width of double skin side bottom..

Cargo capacity
 heavy fuel diesel oil...
Water ballast..
Classification

Russian Maritime Register
 of Shipping KM@JIY1HIIA1

Main engine
Design/manufacturer ..
Model

Number..

Manufacturer..

Number ..

Output...
Lifesaving equipment
Hatch covers

Design

Manufacturer .

Ozmarin .. Volgograd Shipyard

Type... ...Foldtite pontoon
Containers
Lengths 20ft; 40ft
Total FEU/TEU capacity «274/137 on deck .... ..70/35 in holds. ..204/102
Complement...

Bow thruster
Model
Manufacturer..
Number...
Ouitput....

Contract date ..

Launch/float-out date..

Delivery date...

Copies of Significant
Ships of 2004 can be ordered from The

Royal Institution of

Naval Architects.
See order form on page 131

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
POLAR VIKING: fully- refrigerated 60,000m? LPG
 carrier

Shipbuilder:...Hyundai Heavy Industries Co Ltd, Korea

Vessel's name... ....Polar Viking

Hull number: .. 1547
Owner/operator: ........... Hydroship A/S, Norway
Designer:....... Hyundai Heavy Industries Co Lid, Korea
Model test establishment used:............. Hyundai
Maritime Research Institute, Korea (ce Liberia
Total number of sister ships already Ccompleted:....... ccc Nil
Total number of sister
Sips Still ON OFCEL: ooo. eeeeeteeseeteeteeeteteeeseees 1

YUNDAIT'S long experience with the building of

LPG/LNG carriers continues to be rewarded by orders for vessels of these types, selected from a portfolio of ship designs offering various cargo capacities. Hydroship A/S, a subsidiary of the large
Norwegian Norsk Hydro combine, has opted for a 60,000m’ example to operate in its LPG transportation operation: and for readers who find it difficult to relate ‘physical size’ to cubic capacity, Polar Viking equates roughly to a conventional oil tanker of some 46,000dwt.

A newly published work on the subject of LPG catriers (Fully Refrigerated LPG Carriers, by Syd Hatris) suggests that overall design and construction has changed little since the first vessel of this type was delivered 40 years ago, and Polar Viking conforms to a now standard layout, having a flush-deck without forecastle, and a block superstructure aft, built over the machinery room. The hull is of single-skin construction with top and bottom wing ballast tanks, and the cargo space is divided into four holds, into each of which is fitted a free-standing, saddle-supported, prismatic tank, built from low-temperature carbon steel.

These are insulated with 120mm thick polyurethane foam and clad with 5mm Aluzink steel sheeting. The tank design is suitable for a maximum vapour pressure of 0.25bar and a lowest temperature of -48°C. The double-bottom tanks are joined with the adjacent bottom wing tanks to form water ballast spaces which ate separated at the centreline by a duct keel.

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004

Polar Viking is configured to handle two cargoes simultaneously, one of which may be refrigerated.
Typically, these would include Type 2G products such as anhydrous ammonia, butadiene, butane (ISO and normal), butylene, commercial propane (max 3.0 molecular % ethane in the liquid phase), 1, 3-propane, and propylene. Other products can be carried, providing their toxicity, aggressiveness, pressure, temperature and specific gravity are within the limits of the design.

No internal coatings are applied to the tanks, but stainless steel of grades 316L and 304L is used for the piping, and in the construction of the eight cargo pumps which are of Hamworthy Svanehoj vertical deepwell design, electrically driven and fitted two in each tank. Performance of each is rated at 500m°/h, giving a discharge time of approximately 15hours, with loading accomplished in a similar time, based on vapour return to shore. Maintaining the condition of the cargo is a reliquefaction plant fitted in a deckhouse on the upper deck, which includes four oil-free, two-stage catgo compressors capable of handling two compatible cargo grades simultaneously.

Hyundai Heavy Industries built the MAN B&W 5S60MC-C main engine, developing 11,275kW MCR at 105rev/min, also the 6700mm diameter FP propeller, and three diesel-driven alternator sets, each with an output of 1200kW when running at 720rev/min. Steam requirements are served from a KangRim 3000kg/h oil- fired auxiliary boiler, supplemented by a 1500kg/h exhaust-gas economiser. Other machinery installed includes a cargo heater with condenser, and an inert gas generator.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Length, oa... “
Length, bp...
Breadth, moulded .
Depth, moulded, to upper deck
Depth of double bottom
Draught

COSIQN oo. eeeeecececcceeeetetseseesetetsnseseeeseneeeseeeeeeeeesees
 scantling
GOSS) secvevosen
Displacement .
Deadweight
 design ....
 scantling.

Block coefficient
Speed, service at 8750kW/94.6rev/min
Cargo capacity

VIQUID VOIUME oo. eceeeeetetecteeeetsesetsecetsesseeeteeesteees 60,000m*
Bunkers
 heavy oil... .2000m°
 diesel oil »-.200m%
Water ballast... ..16,900m*
Fuel consumption
 main engine only .... 34.76tonnes/day

Classification ...Germanischer Lloyd +100 A5 Liquefied Gas
Carrier, NA V-D, IW, Ship Type 2G, (-48°C, 0.690kg/h at atmospheric), MC, AUT, INERT
Other regulations complied with.....Selection of steel grades used for internal contiguous hull structure based on USCG requirements, including Alaskan waters
Percentage of high-tensile steel used in construction
High-tensile 32kg yield strength
Low-temperature 32kg yield strength
 aus eA TSA AGO TaN LSRaEDEEnencneeneneonenennentanensenesd MAN B&W
SS60MC-C
Hyundai Heavy Industries

NGI ON cass sxs cossess.ovs ons cosnaasevs vvaxsnserssthadsnoasneseesonensnseeeseouvea ces 1

Type of fuel used. ..HFO

Output (NCR)... .8746kW/94.6rev/min
Propeller

Material .. -Nickel-aluminium-bronze

Cap..
Designer/manufacturer ..
Pitch ...
 7600mm

Speed... 4.6revimin at NCR

Engine make/type ...
Type of fuel used
Output/speed of each set..
Alternator make/type@ .......ccceceeeeeee Hyundai/HFC-ICO!

Output/speed of each set.. .3 X 1200kW/720rev/min

Boilers

Number/type ......:.cceeeeseeeeees 1x KangRim oil fired; 1 x
 exhaust-gas economiser

OUtDUE.. eee cece ceeeeeeee 1 x 3000kg/h; 1 x 1500kg/h

Mooring equipment

NUMDET 0. eeceeeeeesteeeseeeeees 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 4 x mooring winch

Make ..Kocks

TYPO veeeceseeseteteeeeseseseseteeeteeseeneees high-pressure hydraulic
Lifesaving equipment

Number/type. 2 x 30-person lifeboats

Make ooo eeeeeeeeseseseeseseteseseseseeesteneseaeessnensees Fassmer
Cargo tanks

Number a4

Grades of cargo carried. wild

Product range Type 2G LPG

Coated tanks.....cccccccessereeseesseeeesesettteeeeseeenes No

Stainless steel... Piping and pumps
Cargo pumps
Number... ..2 per tank: total 8
Type. . i
Make...
Stainless steel ..
Capacity
Ballast control system
Make...

Danfoss Marine System ...remote hydraulic operation

Bridge control system

Make... ..Norcontrol
Type... -Autochief-4
Fire detection system
Make ...
Type ....
Fire extinguishing system
Cargo holds ....Dry powder
Make .......... ..NK Co Ltd

Engineroom

Make...
Radars

Number...

Make...

Models ....
Integrated bridge system

MaKe oo. ceeeteeeeseseseeseseseseseeeeneeneneaee Transas ECDIS

MOE] 0 ..cecececeeeeeceeeeesereeteeeeteteesereeeeenees Navisailor 3000
Waste disposal plant

Incinerator

Model....

Make

Contract date... 10 February 2003
Launch/float-out date .

Delivery date ..13 October 2004
 91
PONT-AVEN:

France/Spain connections

Shipbuilder: ............ ...Jos L. Meyer GmbH (Meyer Werft), Germany
 ...Pont-Aven

Vessel's name:

Hull number: ........
Owner/operator..............Brittany Ferries, France
FLAG? ..eeeeeeceeteeteeees France
Total number of sister
 ships already completed:....... cee Nil
Total number of sister

Ships Still ON Oder: ooo. cece eseteeteeersees Nil

RITTANY Ferties' regular updating/expansion of
 its fleet has continued with the entry into service in 2004 of Pont-Aven, a vessel which, it is claimed, can virtually half the crossing time of any other direct service between UK and Spain. This link is only one of its owner's routes to be served by Pont-Aven on a regular basis, since she will be alternating with crossings on the
UK/France, and Eire/France services.

The ferty's impressive performance is obtained from a machinery installation based on four MaK 12VM43 main engines (a cylinder configuration recently introduced by this engine-builder), each developing 10,800kW and with each pair driving a Wartsila CP ptopellers through a twin-input/single-output Flender reduction gearbox. A power take-off from each gearbox connects with a 4500kW shaft generator, and additional electrical supplies come ftom three diesel- alternator sets driven by Mak 8M35 engines.

Steam requirements ate satisfied from two 5tonne/h oil-fired, and four waste-heat, boilers. Passenger comfort is assisted by two B+V Industrietechnik
Simplex-Compact fin stabilisers of a new type which incorporates anti-vortex tip faitings at the outer end, understood to improve lift and counteract rolling by up to 25%. Two bow thrusters and a stern unit are fitted, together with two 18.5m’ spade rudders.

A Siemens automation system is fitted, which uses fibre-optics technology for many of the connections.
Other particular features of Pont-Aven's domestic services are fresh water generators producing up to 300m*/day from sea water, and two Evac vacuum toilet systems and a biological sewage plant, with temporary storage tanks for black water, held prior to shore discharge. Air conditioning employs central units for public spaces and individually controlled units for cabins, designed to maintain a constant temperature of 23°C, 94

Bow and stern vehicle access is provided to the main deck, with ramps operated hydraulically and serving as watertight doors when closed. The bow is also fitted with a 'butterfly-type’ visor which can only be closed when the forward ramp is locked shut: similarly, the ramp can only be lowered when the visor is open. The stern door is of the one-piece type. Two fixed vehicle decks (main deck and lower garage (tank top)) are provided, with six-panel hoistable decks available above the main deck P&S. A total of 3500lane metres is available, equivalent to 650 cars and 20 trucks.

When carrying only trucks, 72 can be loaded on the main deck (with the hoistable decks in their stowed position) and 16 in the garage, whilst car-only capacity, including hoistable decks, is 703. Unusually, but a sign of current tourist interest, 142 motor cycles can be accommodated. The lower garage is reached via fixed ramps at the fore and aft ends, fitted with hydraulically operated watertight covers.

Pont-Aven can catty a maximum of 2600 passengers in 652 cabins, 210 of which ate outboard, including 16 de- luxe standard, and 18 'Commodote' class featuring ptivate balconies; a private lounge is available for passengers using this class. Nine outside cabins are provided for disabled passengers on deck 6. An attium- style main hall extends from decks 5 to 9 and presents two glass-sided lifts and a glass facade to starboard giving views over the sea.

Shopping facilities are available on the Arcade deck and two cinemas are provided. A self-service restaurant complements the main restaurant on deck 7, and the entertainment areas are on deck 8, connected by a staircase to a mezzanine floor on deck 9 which has stages and dance floors and is adjacent to the casino.
Deck 9 is also the location of the swimming pool, fitted with a retractable glass roof and having access to the sun deck. For those passengers travelling without cabins, a lounge with 47 reclining seats is provided.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Breadth, moulded
Depth, MOUlTSM sir... csscc ads cscrenessuctig es sarston deepal vee crectan oUt Stade’ -
Draught..
Gross
 .41,700gt
Speed. -more than 27.00knots
Classification. Bureau Veritas
Roll stabilisation equipment .............00. B+V Industrietechnik

Simplex-Compact fins

Main engines

DOSIQN eee eect teeeeetereteeeeeeeeeee MAK
 speeding UK/Eire-

Model..
Manufacturer .
Number...

Type.
Propellers

Material
Manufacturer...
Number

Diameter .
Main engine-driven alternators

Output..
Diesel-driven alternators

Engine make/type .

Alternator make .

Output/speed.....
Boilers

NUMDET 0... cece cece tes es eeseeee 2 x oil fired: 4 x exhaust gas

OULPUt ee eee 2 x 5 tonnes/h; 4 x 1.5tonnes/h

Vehicles
Number of decks......
Total lane length.....
Total cars (no trucks)
Total trucks (no cars)....
Doors/ramps

NUMDOR 3:33:62 ieasoesctose 1 x bow visor; 1 x bow ramp/door; 1x stern ramp/door; 1 x hoistable deck 2 x internal ramp hatch covers

Designer ..
Complement.. .
PaSS@NGeTs (MAX)... cecececeseseseteseecseseeesesteeseseessceeseseeneees 2600
Bow thrusters

Make...

Output
Stern thruster

MAKEN. c ss ccsscsesscsnsesssdncnssonsssassonesaryenesdenvestasesta nen tended Feces -

Type ..

Number .

Output...
Contract date 0...
Launch/float-out date ..
Delivery date .......

«1 x 2000kW
 .February 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
HEYDOR aLitel
 & 8
 oa
 mmm
 ~ nalieesesir an
 .
° o® 5 e

PRESIDENT HEYDAR ALIYEV: 13,000dwt tanker for Caspian Sea operations

Shipbuilder: .......... Krasnoye Sormovo Shipyard, 
Russia

Vessel's name:. .... President Heydar Aliyev

Hull number: .... 1

Owner/operator........... Azerbaijan State Caspian

Shipping Co, Azerbaijan

De@SIQneF oo... MNP - Onshore & Offshore
 (MNP - O&O), Russia

Model test establishment used: ................ Krylov

Shipbuilding Research Institute, Russia

FAQ! wee ec cnc teste eeeneneees Azerbaijan
Total number of sister
 ships already completed: ....... eee 5
Total number of sister

Ships still ON OFeM: oo. eee eceeceeetetseteeteeteeteeees 3

HE Krasnoye Sormovo shipyard, situated on the
 river Volga, east of Moscow in the heart of Russia, has a history dating from the mid-19th century, and a reputation covering the construction of ship types - mainly using a large transverse slipway with a trolley system for extruding hulls from a covered hall - ranging from barges to submarines. More recently the yard's production base has been steadily expanding around a portfolio of river/sea vessels, both tanker and dry- cargo, with deadweight capacities reaching to a maximum of around 8000dwt. The company, along with four other shipyards, is a member of a large
Russian industrial conglomerate previously trading as
OMZ, but now renamed MNO - O&O, and which has been involved in the design of Krasnoye's latest newbuilding.

Known as the Project 19619 series, the lead vessel, President Heydar Aliyev, extends those previous limits, and is the largest yet built by the company at Nizhny
Novgorod (Gorkiy), having a deadweight of 13,470tonnes which, it is understood, is the maximum acceptable at local ports without necessitating additional dredging. With a beam of 17.30m, the new design is well within the navigable limits for passing into the Caspian Sea, and it is amongst the rapidly developing oil industry of that region that President
Heydar Aliyev is expected to find its main employment, although classification with the Russian Marine Register of Shipping extends its range of service into areas of ‘mild cold maritime climate’ and 'non-Arctic seas’.
Dimensions will additionally enable the ship to reach the Black Sea and navigate the Volga-Don canal.

Project 19619 exhibits the now typical Russian river- sea profile of long, slender hull with a low air-draught superstructure. Within a double skin there are 12 cargo tanks and a slop tank, arranged for the carriage of crude oil and products with specific gravities up to 0.99tonnes/m’ and a flash point less than 60°C. Two types of cargo can be carried simultaneously, and handling is by means of five Marflex pumps, four of
 96
 which are rated at 350m°/h, and one at 250m°/h.
Viscous cargo heating is provided for use during unloading.

The propulsion installation features twin Wartsila 9L20 main engines, each developing 1620kW at 1000rev/min MCR and each coupled to a 2800mm diameter FP propeller by way of Reintjes reduction gearboxes. Running at 197rev/min, the engines give a service speed of 11.80knots at 85% full power. Three
MAN/Leroy Somer diesel-driven alternator sets satisfy electrical requirements, and steam is generated by two
Aalborg boilers each producing 3.2tonnes/h.
Manoeuvring is enhanced by fitting a bow thruster and twin rudders. The accommodation block aft stands two tiers high above the upper deck and is surmounted by a full-width wheelhouse with projecting centreline conning position.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Breadth, moulded

Depth, moulded
TO MAIN COCK... cece eee eee sete eeeteeeeeseeeeneees

Width of double skin side and bottom..

Draught... eee

Air draught above waterline 19.10m
GOSS oo eceeeeeeereeeeeeees 7833gt
Displacement ,140tonnes
Lightweight 3670tonnes
Deadweight... .13,470dwt

Block coefficient 10.915
Speed, service, 85% MCR, Cargo capacity
HiQUIGD VOIUME oo... cece tects eeeereteneneeeeeeees 14,770m°
Bunkers heavy oil... diesel oil
Water ballast.
Fuel consumption main engines only
 -12.50tonnes/day
 auxiliaries .. ..1.20tonnes/day
Classification .. -Russian Maritime Register of Shipping
Percentage of high-tensile steel used IN CONStFUCTION 0... cece eee eeteeeeeeeeeee 100%
Main engines

HFO ..2 x 1620kW/1000rev/min

Model

NYIMIBGF sos pro cenenesasnasnsrccenasntious saesonesns exam emsraeesaness 2

Output speed 97rev/min
Propellers

Material . Bronze

Designer/manufacturer ..

Number

Pitch
Diameter ..
SPCC... .eeeeeeceecseseseeteesesesneneteseseseseseseeneeeseseees 197rev/min
 3
Engine make/type .. -Liag-MAN D-2840 LF301
Type of fuel......
Output/speed..
Alternator make.type..
Output/speed
Boilers
Number .
Type...
Make .
Output...
Cranes
Number .
Make ..
Type...
Tasks..
Mooring equipment
Number.
Make..
Type ...
Cargo tanks
Number
Grades of cargo .
Product range..
Coated tanks
Stainless steel ..
Cargo pump:
Number..
 -1500rev/min -Leroy Somer/LSAM 49.1 L9 1500rev/min
 -Rolls-Royce (Rauma-Brattvaag)
Electric
 12 plus 1 slop
 5 .MDPC-250S-E; MDPD-100

Capacity
Cargo control system
Make..
Type
Compleme!
Officers...
Crew...
Passengers..
Special rudders..
Bow thruster

Make... Pergales Konceptionas

Output 300kBt
Fire detection system

Make...

Type ...
Fire extinguishing systems
Cargo spaces
 ...Krasnoye Sormovo
Waste disposal plant

Incinerator
Make.... Teamtec
Model... ..OG-12C SW
Sewage plant
Make .... RWO Hammanwassertechnik
Model -SKIT 1,0 HL-Cont Mini L Frame Big

Contract date.. -8 October 2002
Launch/float-out date . «22 June 2004
Delivery date oo... eccccceccteteetsteeeeneeee 26 September 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
PRIMERA: Multipurpose inland waters
 tanker

Shipbuilder: ........ Scheepswerf Den Breejen BV, The Netherlands
 (hull from Nantong Yahua, China)

Vessel’S NAME... ccccccccceeeeeeteteeteeteenes Primera
Hull number: ....... Le
Owner/operator: . ve ....Brabantse
Tanktransporten VO, The Netherlands
 ..INEC BV, The Netherlands .. The Netherlands

Designer:

Total number of sister ships still ON OFdeP: oo... eeeeeeeeee tee eenees -

UCH has been the increase in volume of traffic, and size of ship operating on the inland waters of
Europe over recent years, that newbuildings such as
Primera can now be considered for inclusion in
Significant Ships, alongside vessels which can more readily be desctibed as 'sea going’. As can be seen from the accompanying table, Primera is a large vessel which conforms to the low-profile arrangement long associated with river/canal traders. The wheelhouse is located right aft, mounted on a single, hydraulically operated, retractable column which lowers to reduce ait-draught even further to navigate under bridges. A 'helmsman's hatch' in the roof of the mainly aluminium structure allows the navigator to con the vessel with only his head showing, when the wheelhouse is retracted. Living quarters are arranged aft, at upper deck level and below the wheelhouse, and includes a galley, three double and three single cabins.
The increasing practice of Dutch shipbuilders to use overseas yards to build their hulls is followed here by
Den Breejen, which subcontracted this work to the
Nantong Yahua Shipyard, north of Shanghai, China, after which Primera was brought back to The
Netherlands for completion. The hull is double- skinned, forming port and starboard water ballast spaces, and enclosing a 105.19m long cargo space divided by an arrangement of troughed transverse bulkheads, and a centreline division, into 20 tanks, designed to carry a wide range of liquid cargoes.

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004

A particular feature of Primera's specification is the inclusion in the tank-washing system of a portable machine in which the returned washing water can be sepatated from oil products in an environment- friendly way, and saved for re-use. Supplied by Maas Marine &
Industrial Equipment, the machine can operate at temperatures up to 95°C and is powered by two 30kW centrifugal pumps.

The piping arrangement is laid out on the port side of the deck, with cargo handled by five Bornemann Type
W7/85, 330m°/h electric pumps, collectively operating at 1625m’/h. An ADAS tank gauging system has been installed by ATIS BV, and this records a large amount of cargo data, and controls an alarm system in case of problems. Temperature sensors in each tank have an operating range between 7°C and 150°C, with information on all aspects of cargo operations viewed on a computer scteen in the wheelhouse. Cargo heating is by means of a Butterworth thermal fluid heater of 2900kW capacity, capable of maintaining a transport temperature of 60°C. In addition to the cargo pumps, Primera is fitted with three SIM 150m*/h ballast pumps.

The propulsion plant consists of two, four-stroke, medium-speed, turbocharged and intercooled diesel engines of the DZC type manufactured by the Anglo
Belgian Corp (ABC). Each engine develops 1324kW at 100rev/min, and the arrangement has one engine turning clockwise and the other anti-clockwise.
Transmission is through ZF reduction gears to Van
Voorden propellers enclosed in Hodi nozzles.

Directional control of the vessel is by four hinged- type rudders which can cope with a momentum of 11knots at a maximum angle of 58/75degrees. Also fitted is an Omega 650kW bow thruster with a propeller of 1400mm diameter. Primera draws its electrical supplies from four generator sets: two 112kW alternators driven by 122kW diesel engines, one of 440kW with a 463kW prime mover and a 740kW set with an 820kW diesel engine. All the motors are by
Cummins and the alternators are of Newage Stamford manufacture

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Length, oa eas.
Length (scantling)
Breadth, moulded ...

Depth, MOUIde oo... cece cece cect reeeseeeneeesseseeereeieee 5.50m
Width of double skin

Draught...
Deadweight...
Speed, service
Cargo capacity liquid volume
Classification
Main engines
Design ..
Model...

Output ........
Propellers
Design...

«Cummins 2 x 122kW; 1 x 463kKW; 1 x 820kW.
Alternator make/type ........ceeceeeees Newage Stamford: 2 x UCM274F; 1 x HCM 534F/ 2x 112kW; 1 x 440kW; 1 x 740kW

Boiler
Number.
Make.. ..Butterworth
Type. thermal fluid
Output «.2900kW

Deck machinery

Cargo tanks
Number...
Product range..

Cargo pumps
Number .
Make..
 20
 ..Bornemann

Type.. lectric 137kKW

Capacity 5 x 330m*%/h
Bow thruster

Make .. Omega

Number.

Output...
Radars

Number .

Contract date .
Launch date...

Delivery date.. ..9 July 2004
 99 a

SL earszee
ARMRINGIae

PROTEFS: fourth-generation
Jiangnan Panamax bulker

Shipbuilder:.......................Jiangnan Shipyard (Group) Co Ltd, People's Republic of China

Vessel's name:.... ....Protefs

Owner/operator: ccc Cypres Enterprises
Corp/Diana Shipping Agencies, Greece
Designer: ....Jiangnan Shipyard (Group) Co Ltd, People's Republic of China

Model test establishment USEC: ....... eee -

FAQ! elec cece Bahamas
Total number of sister
 ships already completed: 0... ee 1
Total number of sister

Ships Still ON Oder: voc ececcececeeseeteeteeseeteeeeeees 3

IANGNAN Shipyard is considered to be the oldest
 shipbuilder in China, however, its Shanghai city premises, which date back nearly 200 years, are now scheduled to be moved to a ‘greenfield’ site on an island in the River Yangtze where the company plans to set up two shipbuilding divisions. One of these will specialise in building bulk carriers up to Panamax size (the other will build larger vessels), thus continuing an involvement with this class of vessel begun in 1985, and which now totals over 30 units delivered or on order.

Protefs is an example of the fourth-generation (Mk IV) of the design, and is laid out in conventional style with a single-deck, forecastle, and seven cargo holds contained in a single-skin hull arranged with top and bottom wing ballast tanks, the latter being joined with double-bottom tanks centrally divided by a duct keel.
Exceptions to this arrangement apply under Nos 5 and 6 holds where the port and starboard double-bottom tanks are separated ftom the wing tanks, and are designated as Nos 1 and 2 heavy fuel tanks. Additional fuel is carried in side tanks at the fore end of the engineroom, port and starboard. All ballast tanks, including No 4 hold which can be flooded, ate coated with bleached tar epoxy. Basic tar epoxy coatings are used in the cargo holds.

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004

Heavy cargoes can be loaded into alternate holds (Nos 1, 3, 5, and 7) in line with Lloyd's Register class notation 'strengthened for heavy cargoes: Nos 2, 4, and 6 holds may be empty’, and tanktop, hopper side, and lower stool plating has been strengthened for grab discharge. Transverse bulkheads in the cargo space are of corrugated construction and built on stools at top and bottom of the holds. MacGregor side-rolling, chain-operated hatch covers are fitted, stowing each side of the opening whilst cargo is being worked.

The main propulsion machinery comprises a MAN
B&W 5S60MC Mk6 low-speed diesel engine, manufactured under licence by Hudong Heavy
Machinery (HHM) and developing 10,200kW at 105rev/min. This is directly coupled to a FP propeller running in an open-water stern frame and producing a service speed at 90% MCR (9198kW/102.80rev/min) and allowing a 15% sea margin of 14.40knots. With no shaft-driven alternator fitted, electrical supply is derived from three Yanmar/Taiyo diesel-driven sets each producing 600kW at 900rev/min. Steam requirements ate satisfied from an Aalborg Mission boiler and an exhaust-gas economiser. A Lyngso DMS-21001 engine remote control system is installed and provides bridge operation of the machinery installation.

Accommodation is arranged in the superstructure aft for eight officers, 15 crew and six 'spare' personnel, with the layout featuring an entire deck given over to the captain's quarters. facilities gymnasium. Traditional lifeboats are not provided, instead a free-fall craft with slipway and recovery davit section of the

Leisure include a
 operates over the stern. That accommodation block housing the single-berth cabins and public rooms is separated from the funnel casing to reduce noise and vibration, but the intervening space is utilised by an athwartship gantry carrying a travelling spares and stores crane.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa..
Length, bp.. we
Breadth, MOU 0.0... cccccccceesecceeseeseessesseeseeeeteeeseees 32.20m

Depth, moulded to MAIN COCK oo. cceeeeceeeeteneeeeeeee 19.20m

Gross 40,230gt
Displacement, at 14.05m draught .. 86,035tonnes
Deadweight

COSIQN occ ecceeceeeeeseteteteneesetenetseseseeeseteneneseneeees! 63,395dwt

SCANMING..... eee ceceeeceseeeseeeeetseseeseteneteeeneeees 73,630dwt
Draught
 design... -.12.50m
 scantling ......... ..14.05m
Speed, service at 90% MCR, 15% sea margin....14.40knots
Cargo CAPACILY.... eee eececceesesesesteteeesesesteeeneeestsenens 90,624m*
Bunkers
 heavy oil... --2680m*
 diesel oi 2. 1378
Water ballast. seteeeeeesee 132,480M?
Fuel consumption
 main engine only ..38.45tonnes/day

Classification ...... Lloyd's Register of Shipping +100A1, Bulk
Carrier, ‘Strengthened for Heavy Cargoes, Holds
Number 2, 4, 6 may be Empty, ESN, LI, ESP, 
UMS, SCM
Percentage of high-tensile steel USed IN COMSLUCTION occ eeeeeeeceteseeeeeee approx 45%
Main engine
Design .. . MAN B&W
Model... 5S60MC-Mk6
Manufacturer... Hudong Heavy Machinery
Number
OULPUt oe eeeececeeseteeseesetsesesseesesees
Propeller
Material Nickel-aluminium-bronze
Manufacturer Dalian Marine Propeller Works
Number

Diameter ..

Engine make/type..
Alternator make/type .
Output

Boilers

Number . .Mission OS1600 suet etewoa aon caveats evssuonsvecesenseeuses srs aussauseus axe eosaxsd Aalborg
Output oil fired .. 1600kg/h exhaust gas... ..1300kg/h

Mooring equipment
NUMER oss ssesiesscassssanssssansessaoni 2 x mooring winch/windlass 2 x mooring winch

Make.. ..Luzhou-Hatlapa

Type... Hydraulic
Hatch covers

MakC ooo. eccceceeeeeesecseseseeeresseeeeeeneeeeseeteenenes MacGregor

TYG cor cassnessansxenens ase exorasismeaes savsevsera aeassssersaea wenses Side-rolling
Complement

Officers. 8

Crew...
Spare..
Ballast control system

Bridge control system
Make..
Type...

Fire protection system
Make..
Type ...

Fire extinguishing system
Cargo Holds wo... ceccceeeseceseteteteteeeeeteteeseeeeeeeeeeees
Engineroom ..

Radar

Japan Radio Co ..1 X JMA-9932-SA 1 x JMA-9922-9XA

MaKe... eecececeeceseeteseseeseetesieseseesestseeeneeeenes Japan Radio Co
Model ssrssssicvssessanscss seavssssssass sasststenenea ean 2 x JLR-7700 MkII
Waste disposal system
Incinerator
Make....

LN, Cele [=] ee OGS-200C
Contract date......... 4 December 2002
Launch/float-out date 28 March 2004
Delivery date oo... ecceeeeeseeeeneeeeenees 31 August 2004
 101
RESOLUTION:
 pioneering
 wind-turbine installations

Shipbuilder: ......Shanghaiguan Shipyard (SHG), People's Republic of China

Vessel's NaMe:.....cceee Resolution (launched as
Mayflower Resolution)

Hull MUMDET: oo. eee
 ....Marine Projects
International Ltd (MPI), UK

Designer: ............Knud E Hansen A/S, Denmark
Model tank establishment used: ............. FORCE
Technology (formerly Danish Maritime

Institute (DMI)), Denmark

FlaGs acetic eee eee comer, Isle of Man
Total number of sister
 ships already completed)... eee Nil
Total number of sister

Ships Still ON OFeP: occ eeeeeeeeseeeteeteeneenes Nil

ITH governments in many industtialised
 countries committed to generating around 10% of their energy requirements from renewable sources by 2010, the concept of establishing offshore wind- turbine farms to harness power for electricity generation, is one envitonment-friendly area now being actively exploited. Current offshore technology employs 2MW turbines in which the nacelle housing the gearing is approximately 70m above sea level and the blades some 40m long, but development of 5MW machines is expected soon.

Installing these structures is a complex operation for which MPI (which acquired financially troubled
Mayflower Energy Ltd), working on an idea originally introduced by offshore contractor Global Marine, has developed this unique ship design, in conjunction with consultant Knud E Hansen, IHC Gusto - which engineered the jacking system, and Det Norske Veritas, whose prime challenge was to adapt existing ship and offshore engineering rules and regulations to the structure of this innovative project.

The hull form of Resolution is that of a flat-bottomed, self-propelled barge, with a 'spoon-shaped' fore end incorporating a rudimentary bulbous bow. A two-tier forecastle supports the main superstructure and together they provide accommodation for 70 persons with extensive public rooms and leisure facilities. Above this, the wheelhouse provides a control centre with all- round vision.
 104

Disregarding the support legs, the profile resembles that of an offshore support vessel with a large open deck aft, having a working area of 3200m* capable of storing up to 12 complete 2MW turbines (or 10 x 3.5MW) ready for assembly. Maximum uniform deck loading is 10tonnes/m*; however this can be incteased to 15tonnes/m? between the jackhouses, if loading inboard of the longitudinal bulkheads (positioned 11m either side of the centreline) is restricted to Stonnes/m’.

Handling of components is carried out by two Kenz cranes: a 300tonnes swl unit erected on the centreline at the stern, and a 50tonne auxiliary unit fitted around midships, at the starboard side of the vessel. With this equipment, one complete turbine can be erected each day. Below decks, the hull is subdivided by longitudinal and transverse watertight bulkheads to form water ballast tanks at the wings, and central spaces utilised as voids, leg-machinery rooms, stoterooms, and switchboard compartments, with a central passageway acting as a service corridor.

Central to the operation of Resolution is a Kongsberg
Simrad DP2 class dynamic positioning (DP) installation, which can accurately hold the vessel in position whilst the IHC Gusto jacking system raises it to an operational level to provide a safe and stable working platform. The six legs are arranged in pairs on jackhouses each side of the working deck and have an operating speed of 1m/min. Maximum operational water depth without leg extensions is 25m/35m, and with extension 35m/45m.

Operating in conjunction with the DP system is a
Rolls-Royce power generation and automation installation which makes use of four 1500kW Ulstein
Aquamaster azimuthing thrusters at the stern to provided a transiting speed of 10.50knots, with three 700kW Kamewa Ulstein tunnel thrusters installed at the bow to enhance manoeuvrability. Electrical power is derived from four Mitsubishi 1920kW diesel-generator sets and two 276kW auxiliary sets, positioned in a machinery room at the aft end of the vessel.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, 0a.. we
Length, bp..
Breadth, moulded .

Depth, moulded
 to main deck (No 3)
 to forecastle deck (No 5)..
Depth of double bottom
Draught
 design; as Mobile Offshore Unit..
 scantling
 air; at scantling draught, excluding leg extensions 0.0... cece 57.33m

Gross ........ . 14,990gt
Displacement at scantling draught 0,237tonnes
Lightweight, including legs... 2,408tonnes
Lightweight, excluding legs... 9521tonnes
Deadweight

Cesign draught .......ceceeeeceseneeserees 5295dwt scantling draught 8335tdwt
Block coefficient, scantling Graught ...... cece 0.85

Speed, service at 90% MCR.. .10.5knots

Bunkers

Fuel consumption.
GlaSSiiGatlon si jntiss conpheen fo exeansd

Self-elevating Mobile Offshore Unit, EO, DYNPOS-AUT, CRANE

Percentage of high-tensile steel used in construction
Heel control equipment...
Main generator sets
Engine make.....
Model
 approx 90% by ballast pumps

Mitsubishi .S16R-MPTK-2

NUMDET oe eet eseseseseereceeessesssesesesesessssesesaceseesaeed 4
Type of fuel used. .MDO
Generator make .. .. Stamford
Output... 4 x 2280kVA/1800rev/min
Auxiliary generator sets

Engine Make... eects esses tseeeseessneneees Mitsubishi
Model........ S6B-MPTA
NUMDET 00. eeeeeseeesetenescseessscseeensesesssesesecseseseeeel
Type of fuel

Generator make..

X 325kVA/1800rev/min
 .Ulstein Aquamaster (Rolls-Royce)

US205/3850 va fasbdereadieaes 4 .Controllable
Propeller diamete .2150mm in nozzle
Motor output 4 x 1500kW

Bow thrusters
Kamewa Ulstein (Rolls-Royce)

TT1650CP 3 x 700kW

Main crane
Number/type .... ..1 x EHC300/5500 O S pedestal-mounted rope- luffing, electric-hydraulic, offshore
Main hoist: 12 falls... 300tonnes/25.5m 43tonnes/83m
Whip hoist: 2 falls ....30tonnes/87mM

Kenz Cranes BV

Auxiliary crane
NUMDbET/tyPeC.... cee eect eeetetee eres aoe 1 x EHCS50/3500
O S pedestal-mounted rope-luffing, electric-hydraulic, offshore

Main holst: >fallsivs.t.centeaterctsrativearscscesd 50tonnes/35m
Jacking system
MaKe ooo eee ceeeteeseseseseeeeseeeesecsesesseetesesserenaee IHC Gusto

Jacking system 6 x hydraulic legs
Jacking/overload capacity
ACH lOO iscsi. tescisecssstaves cesesstoveees 3000tonnes/3750tonnes
Static holding capacity .5000tonnes
Leg length including spud cans .. +. .62.33m
Leg length with extensions... 7 1.83m
Cross-section of legs..
Size of spud cans
Mooring and anchoring equipment
Anchors...
Mooring winches .
 2 X 5513kg HHP x mooring winch/windlass 2 x stern mooring winches
MaKe woe eeeceeteeeeeeeeees Rauma Brattvaag (Rolls-Royce)

Complement
Officers...

One man operation.
Dynamic positioning system
Make...
Type ....
Reference system
Radars
Number..
 .Litton Marine Systems

Models ......Bridgemaster S-band ARPA 343/12E, 341/6E
Contract date -
Launch/float-out date =
Delivery date .6 December 2003
Arrival in UK for service ..11 October 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
SAPPHIRE PRINCESS: Japanese Princess makes her debut

Shipbuilder:....... Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd (MHI), Nagasaki Shipyard, Japan

Vessel's name: . Sapphire Princess
Hull number: .. ...2180
Owner/operator: .. Carnival Corp plc, USA/Princess Cruise Lines Ltd, UK

Model test establishment used: ..MHI Nagasaki, Research & Development Centre, Japan

FAQ? veeceeecceceeeeeseeessseesesecetssetesvsesnsees Bermuda
Total number of sister
 ships already completed: ..........cccccceeeeeeee 1
Total number of sister

SHIPS Still ON OFdEP: oe ccc cceeseeeeseeeseeees Nil

AD unfortunate set of circumstances occurring on
October 1 2002, completely changed the history of two cruise liners, Diamond Princess and Sapphire Princess, ordered from MHI in February 2000 by Princess
Cruises, then a subsidiary of P&O Group. With the first vessel nearing completion, a disasterous fite destroyed 40% of its structure, threatening damaging delays to both MHI and Princess's future programmes.
These problems were eventually resolved by first advancing the delivery of the second ship by three months and, on completion in February 2004, giving her the name of her damaged sister, Diamond Princess. A delay of some 10 months was also agteed to allow the reconstruction of that lead vessel, which was finally delivered in May 2004 with the name originally ptoposed for her consort, Sapphire Princess.

The two vessels had been conceived as part of
Princess Cruises' Grand class, initiated with the
Fincantieri-built Grand Princess (Significant Ships of 1998).
Although of similar dimensions and generally following the owner's familiar profile and interior styles, an increase in gross tonnage of some 7000tons is indicative of changes incorporated in the MHI design, which provides 1339 cabins with more than 70% outboard, and over 50% of these arranged with balconies.

Italian designer Giacomo Mortola, and American designer Teresa Anderson, developed interiors featuring seven restaurants offering Princess Cruises's innovative ‘personal choice dining’ policy, and a theatre, dance lounge, casino and other luxurious public areas satisfying the diversified needs of passengers. A tennis court and seven swimming pools are also available.
Sapphire Princess follows her owner's Zero Discharge policy, with comprehensive facilities for collecting and processing all wastes on board, rather than allowing disposal at sea. Another change from the Grand Princess specification sees a reduction in the number of liferafts carried and their replacement by two vertical-chute
MES systems.

Sapphire Princess retains the basis diesel-electric propulsion system fitted to the lead Grand class vessels, 106
 but with only four diesel-driven alternators, plus the addition of a 25,000kW kerosene-burning gas turbine- driven alternator - a power source being increasingly adopted by leading operators - fitted in the funnel. The complete installation, therefore, comprises four alternator sets driven by two eight-cylinder, and two nine-cylinder Wartsila diesel engines of the common- rail type, plus a fifth alternator driven by the General
Electric gas turbine.

These supply power for hotel operation, and for ship propulsion using two Alstom propulsion motors, each driving a FP propeller for a service speed at 86% MCR of 22.10knots. All the prime-movers in the arrangement are designed to provide low-smoke, NOx and SOx emissions, and the garbage incineration plant is equipped with flue gas cleaning. Provision is also made for 'cold ironing’, which means plugging into a shore electrical and steam supply so that alternators and boilers can be shutdown in port to reduce air pollution.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa... ..288.33m
Length, bp...
Breadth, moulded ..
Depth, moulded to main deck (deck 4) to promenade deck (deck 7) to sun deck (deck 15)
Draught design.... scantling
Gross
Deadweight design. scantling..
Speed, service at 86% MCR....
Bunkers heavy oil.. gas oil .
Water ballast. ...5077m*
Classification .....Lloyd's Register +100A1 (Passenger Ship), +LMC, with CCS notation, NAV, IWS
Two, forward and aft
Fincantieri, 2 x 22m? fins
 -14,580dwt 22.10knots

Heel control systems
Roll stabilisation equipment ..
Diesel-electric system
Main engines
Design
Models ...

Wartsila 2 x OL46C; 2 x 8L46C

Manufacturer  Wartsila

Type of fuel ..HFO

Output... x 9450kKW: 2 x 8400kW
Gas turbine

Design...

Model .

Number..

Alternators
Number...

Output

GAS tUrDING oe ee eeeeeeeeeetetesesees 1 xX 31,250kVA
Propulsion motors
Number.
Make.... . Alstom
Output/speed . «2 X 20,000kKW/145rev/min
Propellers
Material .. -Nickel-aluminium-bronze
Designer. MHIWartsila
NUMDEP o.oo. cceeecceecsessesseeseeseseseesescesesscsusssessessssvessssscsseaeeesees 2

Pitch ...
Diameter
Speed ....
Special adaptations
Lifesaving equipment

Escape Chutes... ccceceeseeeseene 2 x 860-person MES

Make.

Type..
Lifeboats.
 .145rev/min
Hub Vortex-Free Cap (HVFC)

Complement
Total cabins...
Total beds

Passengers
Total CADING ...... 1. ccetetestesetteetesesees
Percentage outboard
Total beds

Bow thrusters
MAKE ccscsssscvsissicesseescoseseersneeecomeesese

Output
Stern thrusters

MaKe acccsccsssiecssseseccssneseesessceseeese sense

Number

Output..
Fire detection system

MAK wxssssscassssisssesoccescssnssscerensreeesersoneseed Consilium Marine

Type CS-3000
Fire extinguishing systems

Engineroom..........c CO, and high-pressure water mist

Cabins, public spaces ........cccceeeeee Automatic sprinkler
Radars

Number

Type... .1 x S-band: 4 x X-band

MKC oo... eee ecceesesesseseseseesesessseesseseesesesesseseeseaes STN-Atlas
Integrated bridge system

Make STN-Atlas

Type .. NACOS 65-4
Waste disposal plant

Incinerator
 ..Deerberg
Waste compactor

MIBK wevessxsvervasoonssaresninesa sstssigecsenserneeneeassezezzea Deerberg
Waste shredder/crusher

Make ooo ec eeeesceceesseeseseesesmeseseesessteseeseeeanees Deerberg
Sewage plant

Make ... Hamworthy

Model ... membrane bio-reactor grey and black water treatment system ..25 February 2000 (first) 24 May 2002 (second) 25 September 2003

Delivery date oo. eccceseceessesestssssesessessesseeasesse 27 May 2004

Contract date
Launch/float-out date

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
SCELWN ERINGHE
 rc)

SCELVERINGHE:
 gravel suction dredger

Shipbuilders ......cccccceeeeeee Shipyard K Damen, |
The Netherlands °
 (hull from Aker Braila, Romania)
 ...Scelveringhe |
 743

Sst ona sssansvasuomnga tsaaheary Scelveringhe

Scheepvaart BV, 
The Netherlands

D@SIQNET: 0. cecccceeeeeeeeeetee Shipyard K Damen, 
The Netherlands

FAQ? vee cece eeeeeee The Netherlands
Total number of sister
 ships already completed)... cee Nil
Total number of sister

Ships still ON OFer: oo. ceccccceeceeeeesteeseeteeteeees Nil

CELVERINGHE differs from most other suction
 hopper/dredgers featured recently in Significant
Ships, in that its principal function is to dredge sand and gravel for commercial use. Having completed this operation, the vessel returns to harbour to unload on to the quayside. The cargo is carried in a 3880m’ hopper, within a double hull structure forming wing tanks used for fuel, and for fresh water used for rinsing out the hoppet.

Discharge utilises a self-unloading system designed and engineered by the shipyard, which employs a gantry fitted with a special 18m’ grab, travelling over the hopper on tracks at each side coaming, picking up sand and gravel which is deposited on a conveyor belt mounted on the fore deck, port side, then transferred to a centreline-mounted shore discharge conveyor belt, 47m long and capable of rotation through 360deg. It is electro-hydraulically operated, using a power pack taking its electrical supply from one of two 1800kW alternators driven from the main engine, and can transfer cargo to shore at a rate of 2000m°/h.

Loading Svelveringhe is accomplished using an 850mm suction pipe, trailed over the starboard side of the vessel from a position forward of the hopper space, and supported when dredging by intermediate davits along the ship side, and stowed on deck when not in use.
Maximum dredging depth is 33.50m, and the operation is carried out using a diesel-driven sand pump installed forward, having a capacity of 15,000m°/h. The prime mover is a MaK 6M25 engine developing 1850kW, and the pump connection is through a Flender gearbox.
 108

Shipyard K Damen has managed to introduce an element of sophistication not normally seen in this class of working vessel, into the exterior design of
Scelveringhe. In particular, the hull, which was built in
Romania by Aker Braila, exhibits a pleasing profile featuring sweeping bulwark-lines and _ sloping deckhouse plating. A maintenance-friendly structure has been aimed for, with flush fittings on the exposed decks, and cortosion-sensitive features such as window frames and door hinges, executed in stainless steel. The accommodation arrangement incorporates double- berth suites for the captain and chief engineer, eight single-berth crew cabins, and mess and dayrooms. The wheelhouse has open bridge wings, and the entire block is well insulated, heated and ventilated.

The main engineroom is positioned below the deckhouse and contains the Mak 9M32C main engine, developing 4320kW at 600rev/min. A Flender GRCA 750 gearbox reduces revolutions at the Lips CP ptopeller to 178rev/min, for a ship's speed of 13knots, which, coupled with the high loading and dischaging capacities, gives the vessel the advantage of quick turn- rounds. Two 1800kW Leroy Somer alternators are driven from the main engine and two Caterpillar 190kW diesel alternator sets are also installed. Assisting manoeuvrability is a 750kW bow thruster.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa.... aia
Length, bp....
Breadth, moulded ...
Depth, moulded

Draught ‘
Gross ..5116gt
Deadweight .. .7750dwt
BlOCKiCOCHICIOME aes ses ses sasesns ses cesnsrcion sss eovavenons couvesenasoasansi 0.864
SPCC, SCMICES issscissssssssecasessnanecssatsssssvaees cesses evae 13.00knots
Cargo capacity

SANC/QLAVE] oo. eeeeeceeceecee essere eseseeneesesessseteeeseeeeeets 3880m°
Bunkers

Cie@Sel Of. cee ceeeeseeeeeectecsesceeessesesenenseeesseeeeses 600m°
Water ballast
 in fore peak
 fresh water in side tank -
Classification .... ... Lloyd's Register of Shipping +100A1, ‘Dredger’, + LMC, UMS
Main engine
Design ..
Model ...

Manufacturer ..
 self-unloading sand and

Output speed.. ..178rev/min
Propeller

Designer/manufacturer. . Lips (Wartsila)

Diameter ..
Speed...
Main engine-driven alternators
Number...
Make/type. ....Leroy Somer
QUID ses ses sapscusssssoncasseutcnnicias asian atsastenns erneees 2 x 1800kW

Dredging gantry/grab crane
Number .

Grab capacity.

Task... ..Unloading sand/gravel

TYPO. ecessecessesesteseeseseeseseeseseeseseesesesneneseeses electric-hydraulic

Performan scssssississssssssazsusseassan 2000m*/h (in association
 with belt conveyors)

Lifesaving equipMeNt......... cesses 1 x free-fall lifeboat
Cargo pumps
Number...

Make/type .
Capacity...
Prime mover.
Gearbox....
Complement...
Bow thruster
 -15,000m*/h

Fire extinguishing systems .
Radars

Number . i

Make.. ..Furuno
 .1 x X-band sea radar; 1 x S-band sea radar;
 1 x river radar

Contract date December 2002
Launch/float-out date .December 2003
Delivery date June 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
SPAR LYRA: Diamond 53 - a forward- looking Ultra-Handymax bulker

Shipbuilder:............. Chengxi Shipyard, People's

Republic of China
 ... Spar Lyra
 we CX4204

Owner/operator: ......Spar Shipping A/S, Norway

D@SIQNES: oo. eceeeeteteteteteeteteeetee Carl Bro A/S, 
Dwinger Marineconsult, Denmark

Model test establishment used: ...........0 SSPA, 
Sweden

FIAQ! ..cceeeeeee Norwegian International Register
Total number of sister
 ships already completed:........ cece Nil
Total number of sister
 ships still on order: ............ 13 (various owners)

HEN Cardiff-based Graig Shipping sold its last
 bulk carrier in 1995, it seemed that yet another old established tramp-ship owner was heading towards closure. Neverthless, re-organisation under the grandson of one of the company's founders has brought new success, resulting from new partnerships.
Initially these involved Graig, as technical manager, and the Danish Clipper Group as commercial operator, building a series of nineteen 8870dwt Confidence-class multi-purpose vessels (Clipper Confidence: Significant Ships of 1997), designed by Carl Bro, Dwinger. Graig is today joined with the other partners to provide a global marine service encompassing all aspects of shipbuilding, shipowning, management and finance.

Without mandatory compulsion, and faced with a significant additional cost, owners, in the main, have rejected double-hull bulk carrier designs, but, with this
Diamond 53 series Graig/Carl Bro claim to have developed a ship which responds to calls for safer and stronger bulk carriers and, by using Chinese (and soon, Vietnamese) shipyards, can overcome the problems of ptice premium. As obvious as the safety aspect of the double skin is the fact that the resulting flush cargo space interiors have an economic value by facilitating cleaning operations and reducing cargo handling time.
Mote specific to this particular design is that the additional water ballast capacity provided within the double hull obviates the use of No 3 hold for heavy weather ballasting, although that compartment is still designated for dual use, if required in other circumstances.

Other features of the Diamond 53 design include only limited use of high-tensile steel, and the development of an overall robust structural design with a maximum allowable hull girder bending moment 50% to 70% higher than class minimum. This feature enables cargo to be evenly distributed between holds
Nos 1, 3, and 5, when loading to scantling draught with alternate holds (Nos 2 and 4) empty. Usually, single-skin
Handymax bulkers require to load more cargo in No 3 hold in this condition. Uniform tanktop loading in all holds is 25tonnes/m? and the vessel can carry a full deadweight comprising two tiers of steel coils, weighing 25tonnes each, supported on timber dunnage, as well as the whole range of bulk cargoes.
 110

The design has been configured to a Panamax beam of 32.26m with five holds and hatches, the latter providing virtually open access into the cargo spaces. A forecastle and forward breakwater afford protection for deck cargo and hatches. The double-hull arrangement incorporates top and bottom wing tanks, common with the side spaces and extended athwartships at the hatch ends as voids.

All piping and valves, plus electric cables, together with fore and aft crew accesses, are run in wing and double bottom pipe ducts, to improve maintenance and safety. The hatchways are closed by end-folding, high- stowing, hydraulically operated covers having a timber loading of 2.5tonnes/m’, with cargo handling utilising four 36tonne electro-hydraulic deck cranes mounted on the centreline and working to a 28m radius.

The Diamond 53 design has been developed to operate with either a Sulzer ORTA48T-B, or MAN
B&W 6S50MC-C main engine, with the owner of Spar
Lyra opting for the latter, a 9480kW/127rev/min unit which, when running at 82% MCR (7750kW) at scantling draught, and allowing a 15% sea margin, produces a service speed of 14knots. Electrical requirements are satisfied by three Daihatsu/Nishishiba 680kW diesel-alternators.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa....
Length, bp....
Breadth, moulded
Depth, moulded to upper deck
Width of double skin

Draught scantling . design.

Gross ...

Displacement ..

Lightweight

Deadweight
SCANTING....eeeeeeeeeseeeeseseecsesssetesseecerssesseseeeesees 53,000dwt design .44,800dwt

Block COCFICIONE eect ce ete eeeseeesesestateseseseeseeeneneed 0.85

Speed, service at 82% MCR, 15% sea margin, 12.60m draught .........cccceees 14.00knots
Cargo Capacity... ec cccceceeseeceesesseesesseeeeses 65,700m*
Bunkers
 heavy oil.. diesel oil..

Water ballast, including No 3 hold.....

Fuel consumption main engine only .. auxiliaries

Classification
 ...11,600tonnes
 ..33.10tonnes/day ....2.50tonnes/day ..Det Norske Veritas +1A1 Bulk Carrier, ESP, NAUTICUS (Newbuilding), BC-A (Holds
Nos 2, 4 or 3 empty), GRAIN-U, HA(+), DK(+), iB(+), EO, TMON

Steel percentages used in construction........ 57% mild steel, 33% NV32, 10% NV36

Main engine
Design . MAN B&W
Model .. ....6S50MC-C
Manufacturer .. .Hudong Heavy Machinery
Number 1

Type of fuel.

Output 9480kW/127rev/min
Propeller

Material ..........cesssenssacasasessseseies Nickel-aluminium-bronze
 ..SSPA/Zhenjiang
Propeller Factory 1

Designer/manufacturer

Number
Pitch .....
Diameter ..
Speed... cece
Diesel-driven alternators

Engine make/type .
 aes eerreSen ever erase HFO 3 x 770kW/720rev/min -Nishishiba/NTAKL-VE ..3 X 680kW/720rev/min

Type of fuel used
Output/speed.....
Alternator make/type.
Output/speed
Boiler
Number-....
Type..
Make .
Output..
Cargo cranes
 4 x 36tonnes/28m outreach
Mooring equipment

NUM N ccsiges cvs ronessas ons ensosa eves 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 2 x mooring winch
 ..Hatlapa (China)

Hydraulic

Type
 1 x 23person, free-fall
Make.. we NPT
Huahai-TTS .Huahai-TTS/shipyard

Type ..End-folding/double-skin/hydraulic
Ballast control system

Make. Pleiger

Type.. DMVP IPM

Crew..
Suez/repair crew
Single/other rooms.
Bridge control system
Make .
Type..
One man operation...
Fire detection system
Make
Type ..
Fire extinguishing system
Cargo holds/engineroom .
Make
Radars
Number
Make..
Models ..
Waste disposal plant
Incinerator
Make...
Model .
Sewage plant
Make ......
Model..
Contract date.
Launch/float-out date...
Delivery date
 .Kelvin Hughes 2; 1 x CAE-A36

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
SUOMIGRACHT: multi- purpose/forest products
 carrier

Shipbuilder: . .. Stocznia Szezecinska Nowa, 
Poland

Vessel's name: .. ... Suomigracht

Hull number: B587-IV/6

Owner/Operator: oc. ccccecceceeneeeeees Spliethoff's

Bevrachtingskantoor BV, 
The Netherlands

Designer: 0.0... Stocznia Szczecinska Nowa, 
Poland

Model test establishment used:.............. HSVA, 
Germany

Flag: ..... The Netherlands
Total number of sister
 ships already completed.... . Nil

Total number of sister
Ships still ON OFder: oo... ececeeeeeteeeeeeeeteeeeee 2

YGNIFICANT Ships of 2000 reported on two neat-
 sister vessels, built in Japan and Poland as part of an order for 10 specialist designs placed by Spliethoff against a Finnish forest products charter. The Dutch owner has now returned to Szczecinska with an order for four more vessels, the first of which is a direct repeat of the year 2000 series, whilst the remaining three, of which Swomigracht is the lead, are of a larger, modified design, which features only two box-shaped, flush-surfaced, main holds, rather than three in the earlier vessels.

In both designs, an additional small hold (No 0) is located forward. The upper deck hatch covers are a combination of hydraulically operated folding and rolling panels, with the second deck closed by pontoons handled by the ship's cranes, and capable of being positioned to form a tweendeck at three levels (6050mm/9900mm/13,100mm above the tanktop), or located vertically as grain bulkheads or cargo divisions.
The 9900mm level is considered as the main-deck position.

Although forest product exports from Finland will provide Swomigracht's main employment, transporting bulk and general backhaul cargoes, including those in
IMO classes 1-8, are essential to her economic running, consequently three side-mounted 120/90/55tonne swl hydraulic deck cranes are fitted, unusually positioned two on the port side and one starboard, with tandem lifts up to 240tonnes possible for project cargoes.

Container capacity in the holds is 555TEU, with 728 mote catried on deck, where 120 reefer plugs are provided. The innovative TTS side-loading system installed in the earlier series has again been adopted to facilitate handling of forest products, and comprises five hydraulically operated 4m x 2m loading platforms, each lifting 16tonnes and capable of working cargo at 500tonnes/hour.

Movement into No 1 hold is through watertight doors in the transverse bulkhead. Cargo operations are

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
 monitored by CCTV from the local control room and wheelhouse. An Intering pneumatic system is fitted to counter heel when all loaders are working, and forklift trucks are in use. Mechanical ventilation and air-drying systems ate provided in the cargo spaces, which are also served by a firefighting water spray system using sprinklers fitted in the hatch covers.

In common with a number of modern Szczecinska
Nowa designs, Swomigracht features a hull form incorporating an assymetric stern configuration aimed at improving wake efficiency. The design conforms to the requirements of Ice Class 1A and Finnish/Swedish rules, and the hull structure at the bulbous bow, and aft of the rudder blade includes ice-knives.

A Wartsila 6L64 main engine, developing 12,060kW at 333rev/min, drives a CP propeller at 105rev/min through a Renk gearbox for a service speed at design draught, when operating at 85% MCR, of 19.30knots.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Breadth, moulded .
Depth, moulded to upper deck.. to main deck...
Width of double skin side .... bottom...
Draught design... scantling
Gross 18,100gt
Deadweight design .... . scantling. 23, 750dwt
Speed, service at design draught, fo .19.30knots
Cargo capacity (tweendeck pontoons excluded).. .27,550m?
Bunkers heavy oil. diesel oil.
Water ballast...
Water ballast carried in loaded condition..
Fuel consumption main engine only auxiliaries ..
Classification ..
 .. 42tonnes/day 2.4tonnes/day . Lloyd's Register of Shipping +100A1, Strengthened for Heavy Cargoes, Container Cargoes in Holds, Upper Deck, Upper Deck Hatch Covers, Timber Deck Cargoes, Ice Class 1A (Finnish/Swedish Rules), LA, Ll, NAV1, *IWS, with descriptive notation PCWBT, Tank Top Suitable for
Regular Discharge by Grabs, +LMC, UMS, SCM
Percentage of high-tensile steel used in construction
Heel control system
Main engine
Design.
Model.
Manufacturer .
Number

Intering (Rolls-Royce)
 . Wartsila

HFO/MDO 12,060kW/333rev/min

Type of fuel used .
Output
Gearbox

Number
Output speed.
Propeller
Material
Designer/manufacturer
Number
 .Controllable
Diameter . ...6200mm
Speed...
Main-engine-driven alternator
Number...
Make/type
Output/speed.
Diesel-driven alternators
 . Taiyo/FEK 45DL-4 1000kW/1800rev/min

Engine make/type.
Type of fuel used..
Output/speed
Alternator make/type
Output/speed
Cargo cranes
Number
Manufacturer.
 ..Neuenfelder Maschinenfabrik (NMF) beveeeeeeaees DK II 120017/90016/55033

Performance 120/90/55tonnes at 16/19/33m radius

Type Electro-hydraulic
Mooring equipment

NUMDE? oo. eeeeeteeeteeeeeeeee 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 2 x mooring winch

Make. Towimor

Type... .electric
Lifesaving equipment

Number.... ..1 X GAR-T6, 7

Make/type. .Fassmer/freefall
Hatch covers

D@SIQN wee eeeceteeeeeeee .MacGregor
 .Stocznia Szczecinska Nowa ..upper deck: hydraulic folding/rolling tweendeck: pontoons

Doors/lifts
Side shell cargo doors
Internal cargo doors .
Side loaders
System operation
 5 x 16tonne lift
 hydraulic power packs
TTS
 sesrasuvase es serene sev suenay cavonsessess vavenonrss es 20ft; 40ft; 45ft ..8ft; 8ft 6in; Oft 6in

Cell guides Rare)
Total TEU capacity.
On deck.. 728

In holds...
Homogeneously loaded to 14tonnes.
Reefer plugs
Tiers/rows: on deck ..

MaKe ooo eeccceeeeseseenesesesnenseseeneeseecsnsnetstessssssenensees Pleiger

TY DO sosexsiosenesamnvesssvasea riasiniensacesesesees Remote control valves
Complement

Officers. a8

Crew...... 215

Spare... cece 4

Suez/repair crew.
Stern appendages...
Bow thruster
 . Assymetric stern
 -ABB Zamech

Output....
Bridge control system
Make... Wartsila/Lips
Type... . Lipstronic/Plath Navipilot V/HSC-G-TMC.
OMe-MAN DrIAGE..... se ceceesesseeesesseseesesneseeneseeneetenesteneetenee Yes
Fire detection system
Make... Zenitel Marine
Type. Servomaster addressable
Fire extinguishing system
Cargo holds . .CO,/Water sprinkler

Make...
Engineroom ..

Engineroom (local spray).
Waste disposal plant
Incinerator
Make oo. ececccceeeseceeseeeeseeeseenenesesereseeneeeeseecseeeens Teamtec
MOE]... cecesesceseeeseesesresneneseseeeneecsessneneeeeneeeenees GS500C
Waste compactor
Make....
Model ..
Waste shredder/crusher
Make ....
Model ...
Sewage plant

Launch/float-out date

Delivery date... .30 November 2004
 113
Mes th a ee ao
Flee al

Rc
 a. a
Gigerié-terries
 = are
 {a TSU
 =i = coc +

TASSILI II: new tonnage for Algeria-
Spain-France link

Shipbuilder: 0... IZAR (Sevilla yard), Spain
Vessel's name:. .. Tassili Il
Hull number: ....

Owner/operator:.........0. Enterprise Nationale de
Transports Maritimes de Voyageurs (ENTMV), Algeria

FAQ! oeeeeeeceeeeee ee eset eese ncn ereteeneeeeeeieea Algeria
Total number of sister
 ships already completed:........c eee Nil
Total number of sister

Ships Still ON OFCOM: oo. ceeseeteetetteeteeteeteenes 1

VSSILI II is the first of two sister ships ordered
 from IZAR's Sevilla shipyard by the Algerian state- owned ferry operator ENTMV, for service between
Algiers and Marseilles, with an intermediate call at the
Spanish port of Alicante. When the second vessel, E/ Djazair, joins the fleet in May 2005, replacement of three existing ferries, built in the early 1970s and now employed on the route, will be complete. Unlike other ro-pax ferries built recently at Sevilla, where the design emphasis has been on the freight (Dawa Merchant, Significant Ships of 1998), tather than the passenger side of the combination, Tassi/i II has involved the yard in presenting a ship with high-quality accommodation and facilities for 1300 passengers, carried in two classes.

Standard-class passengers (400) are carried at the aft end of the ship with 908 economy class berthed forward. Each has its own access and reception area on
Deck 5, and separate stairways and lifts to other decks.
Decks 5 and 6 provide two and four-berth cabins suitably equipped for the two classes, and a seties of lounges each with 60 'business-class' seats. Shops and medical facilities are also located on deck 5, whilst deck 7 provides the main eating areas with cafeteria and restaurant service. A lounge and a dance floor ate also found hete, together with a central galley serving both passenger and crew requirements. Crew accommodation is provided on deck 8 for 119 personnel.

Freight capacity is 1350lane metres, equivalent to 300 cats or 42 trucks, with entry through bow and stern doors on to deck 3. MacGregor supplied and installed cargo access equipment comprising a bow door with parallel swing-arm doors which are always self-closing
 116
 by virtue of sea/wave pressure; bow ramp (16m long including flaps x 5.2m wide - offering a 4m wide driveway) forming a watertight door when closed; foldable stern ramp (14.6m long including flaps x 8.20m, with a 7m driveway).

Internal movement between decks is accomplished using four ramps, arranged between decks 3 and 4, and measuring 20.0m long, including flaps, and 9.30m wide.
Ten hoistable car-deck panels with an overall area of around 900m* provide additional vehicle stowage alongside the casings between decks 3 and 4, and are accessed by means of hoistable ramps at each end. Two hydraulic systems serve the equipment forward and aft, with a cross-connection for increased redundancy.

The propulsion plant is formed by two Wartsila 12V46 main engines each developing 12,600kW at 500rev/min. Two shaft lines with Geislinger resilient couplings and Wartsila reduction gears drive CP propellers, enabling the ship to attain 22knots in service.
The four auxiliary engines are Wartsila 8L20C units, connected to Leroy Somer 1712kVA alternators. Also within a Wartsilé package are two Lipstronic type 7000 propulsion control systems, and two 1000kW CP bow thrusters. Coastguard MC sterntube seals are fitted - the only type considered by the operator to be pollution- free.

Safety has been a prime consideration of the design, and an innovative Automatic Ship Identification System (AIS) for both security and collision prevention has been installed. Tassi/i II has also been fitted with a Ship
Safety and Alert system (SSAS) in accordance with the new International Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) requirements, 
TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, overall. see
Length, bp
Breadth, moulded
Depth, moulded, to main deck.

Draught......... .6.00m
Deadweight .. 2900dwt
Speed, SEPVICE oo e cece eteereteteesteeeeeeetesees 22.00 knots
Bunkers

«780M 150m?

Water ballast.
Classification.

Bureau Veritas 1 + Hull, Mach, Boilers, Ro-Ro

Passenger Ship, Unrestricted Navigation, SDS, *AUT-UMS, AUT-PORT

Roll stabilisation CQUIPMENt...... eee Litton Marine
Main engines
Design.. Wartsila
 12V46

Output
Gearboxes
Make ....
Model
Number...
Output speed..
Propellers
Designer/Manufacturer .......cccccccecseereesieeseesees Wartsila
Number.

Diesel-driven alternators

NUMDE? si ssssansasssscvssesssnscan ces cog avs cosnavsevsasasane sta reveateesaausaens ad 4
Engine make/type .. ..Wartsila/8L20C
Output/speed...... «4x 1440kW/1000rev/min

Leroy Somer -4 x 1712kVA/1000rev/min
Rolls-Royce Marine

Alternator make..
Output/speed
Mooring equipment .
Lifesaving equipment

Number/make ..........600+ 4 x Viking VEC tubes each with
 2 + 1x 101-person liferafts

Total CAPACI... ccc tee eects rsteeeieeteeseeeeeereees 1212
Doors/ramps

Number/type......... 1 x bow door; 1 x bow ramp/door; 1 x
 foldable stern ramp; 4 x internal ramps;
 10 x hoistable car deck panels
Hydraulic ..MacGregor

Type
Designer...
Complement
 119

«400

Standard class .. . +908

Economy class..
Special rudders
Type...
Make .
Bow thrusters
 10.4m? KSR flap-type
 .2 x 1000kW . Sprinkler and CO, 
Fire extinguishing systems..
Contract date
Launch/float-out date... -
Delivery date ..22 October 2004

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
TEH MAY: bulk carrier

Shipbuilder: ........ cee Shanghai Waigaoqiao
Shipbuilding Co Ltd, People's Republic of China

Vessel's name: . ... Teh May

General agent: ....... cece Foremost Maritime
Co Ltd, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China
Designer: 0... Peter Cheng Naval Architect & Marine Consultant Ltd, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China
Model test establishment used: ..SSPA, Sweden
FAQ! vececscececesetetesteseeteeeessesees Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China

Total number of sister
 ships already Completed: 0... cere 7
Total number of sister
Ships Still ON OFder: .... cee cceceeeeseeeeteeteneeeenes 20
 iF is interesting that among the first deliveries from
China's showpiece 'greenfield' shipyard Shanghai
Waigaoqiao, should be of a new-generation Capesize bulk carrier design, since it might be argued that there is little fresh to offer to this already well-filled market, restricted in its scope by the dimensional parameters imposed at the French port of Dunkirk. However, Dr
Peter Cheng, who originated this design on behalf of the shipyard and the owner of the lead ship CSK
Fortune (delivered in 2003), has followed up his extensive research into existing vessels of this type, and of the requirements of prospective operators, by developing this innovative new standard.

The type-designation 'Green Cape' gives an idea of
Dr Cheng's approach to the project. Within the traditional configuration of the class: single-deck without forecastle, nine cargo holds, bulbous bow, transom stern, top and bottom wing tanks, double- bottom tanks centrally divided by a duct keel, and no cargo gear, great attention has been given to 'green! issues, with all bunker tanks protected by 1200mm wide cofferdams, particularly in way of the side shell. Most of these are located in aft saddle tanks. Additionally, no bunkers are carried in the double bottom, and facilities ate provided for emptying fuel and lubricating oil tanks by portable pumps should the vessel be immobilised.

A teview of wing ballast tank disposition sees none spanning more than one hold (except for a short extension of No 8 upper wing tank into the adjacent
No 7), and no connection between upper and lower tanks in an arrangement which, it is claimed, reduces shear and bending moments during ballast exchanges and allows this operation to be carried out in bad weather. Another change from most existing designs is the shift of most bunker tanks from the sides of the engineroom to the upper wing tanks in Nos 8 and 9
 118
 holds, a transfer forward of some 4000tonnes which not only reduces the bending moment but allows 'even keel' conditions to be maintained by replacing bunkers in the upper wings as they are consumed, by ballast in the nearby aft peak and No 9 bottom wing tanks. All ballast tanks are fully utilised in both normal and heavy weather conditions, and exchanges at sea are carried out only on an 'empty-and-fill’ basis, with no transfers made between tanks at any time.

Unusually, perhaps, in the current political climate, Teh
May is single-skinned. She features nine holds closed by side-rolling weathertight covers and can accept loading of ore in alternate holds 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9. Tanktop strengthening for grab discharge is included and No 6 hold is arranged as a floodable compartment. Numbers 2, 4, and 8 holds can be partially flooded in port only, to achieve an ait-draught of 13.70m above hatch covers.

The main engine is an MAN B&W 6S70MC Mk 6 unit developing 14,331kW NCR at 86.2rev/min for a service speed of 15knots. Three Daihatsu/Nishishiba 750kW alternators serve electrical requirements, and a vertical composite boiler provides steam.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa.... oe
Length, bp...
Breadth, moulde:
Depth, moulded to upper deck ..
Draught
CESIQN oe seeeeceeceeeseeecseeeteeeeesseeeseseseesssesseseseneseneseees 16.50m scantling .

Displacement design draught . scantling draught..

Lightweight

Deadweight design draught . scantling draught..

Speed, service at NCR..

Cargo capacity
 178,855tonnes 197,852tonnes ..22,766tonnes
 ..156,088dwt ..175,085dwt ... 15knots

QUAD scescecsrsssvea narecoins cero mamnncecasys ra vomeesomences LOOpOAT Ml
Bunkers
 heavy oi ..4554m?
 diesel oil... ..378M9
Water ballast
 total wn ..74,126m*
 excl No 6 hold ..51,687me

Fuel consumption main engine only (loaded condition).. auxiliaries (2 alternators running). ..4.50tonnes/day
Classification .....American Bureau of Shipping +A1(E), Bulk
Carrier ESP, ‘Strengthened for Heavy Cargoes
Nos 2, 4, 6, 8 holds may be empty’ SH, SHCM, +ACCU, UWILD, HCS
 ..53.8tonnes/day

Percentage of high-tensile steel

USE IN CONSTFUCTION......c.cceeee tees teteteeseetenees approx 70%
Main engine
Design . MAN B&W

Model... ..6S70MC (Mk 6)
 enter the 'Green Cape'

Manufacturer..
 a
Type of fuel used.. FO .16,860kW/91 rev/min MCR; 14,331kW/86.20rev/min; NCR

Propeller
Material -Nickel-aluminium-bronze
Designer/manufacturer ..Nakashima Propeller Co
NUMDET oo. cece cee ces eecseesesecesesesssssessenessseessssnessseneeees 1
Pitch ....

Diameter .
 3
Engine make/type Daihatsu/6DK-20

Type of fuel. . .HFO

Output/speed. : rev/min

Alternator/type ......cececeeceeceeeeeesneeeseeseseenenees Nishishiba/-

Output/speed.... ..3 x 750kW/900rev/min
Boiler

Number

Type.. ..OVS2-250/170-33 vertical composite

Make. Osaka Boiler
Mooring equipment

NUMDET oo. eee eeeeeeeteereeeeee 2 x mooring winch/windlass;
 6 x mooring winch

MKC oo ceeeceeceeeteeeeseeetsesseseeeeeeseeeteneneeessseeeeseee Kawasaki

TYPO i.scsseescessscsnnsanenensoenggeintiedinsdadsaibive ceases acnbeeT a8 Hydraulic
Hatch covers

Design. Hydraulic chain drive

Make.... MacGregor

TYPO. eeeeeeeceteeseeeeeteeseseseeenensesrestessessnenersersieeneee side-rolling

Pleuger & Utsuki 303004

Spare.
Suez/repair crew .
Fire detection system

MaKe ooo. eececceeseeeneeerseesetsesessesseeeseieseeees Engtek Pte Ltd

Fire extinguishing systems
Cargo holds...
Engineroom ....
Make... ceccceceseeecsesescseetsesecsessnecseseseneseesssesieseees

Radars
Number
Make..
Models . x

Integrated bridge system

Waste disposal plant

Incinerator

Make ..

Model. OG 400C
Waste compactor

Make.. .Electrolux

Model.. .8251L
Sewage plant

MKC oo. ces ee ete ee eseesenecseeseseseenene Jiangsu Nanji

Model..
 ..WCB-40(S) 18 October 2003 28 August 2004

Contract date
Launch/float-out date..
Delivery date

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
VILLE DE BORDEAUX

VILLE DE BORDEAUX: specialist ro-ro for
Airbus transport

ShIPbUIIder cee eeeeeeeee vinling Shipyard, People's Republic of China

Ville de Bordeaux desetueeeeees LZ020401 ...Fret/CETAM, France (a joint company formed by

Louis Dreyfus Armateurs, France, and Leif Hoegh, Norway)

D@SIQNETS! oo. ccceeceeereteeee Deltamarin (basis design),Finland/Jinling

Marine Design Co, People's

Republic of China

Model test establishMent .......cecccteeeneeteees
US -\0 nr Hamburg Ship Model

Vessel's name: ..
Hull number: ...
Owner/operator: .

Basin (HSVA), Germany
Total number of sister ships already Completed:......cccccceseeceees Nil
Total numberof sister ships still on order:............ One option pending

IHE A380 aircraft is the latest product of the joint

European Airbus consortium and its development has presented major logistical challenges, mainly resulting from the basis of the Airbus concept, which involves the construction of major components in a number of European countries, and their transport to
Toulouse in southern France for assembly. Because of the sheer size of these parts, sea transport has been chosen to move fore and aft fuselage sections from
Hamburg: tail sections from Puerto Real (Spain): cockpit and central fuselage from St Nazaire; and wings from North Wales (UK), necessitating the building of dedicated terminals at some of the loading/discharging ports, and of special craft to carry the components in and out of restricted waterways.

Performing the sea-going legs of the operation is
Ville de Bordeaux, a to-to vessel configured to the now familiar ferry layout of a full-length superstructure topped by the bridge and accommodation right forward. The funnel casing is aft, above a machinery room containing the two Caterpillar Mak 9M43 main engines. Each developing an MCR output of 8400kW, these drive twin CP propellers through Flender gearboxes for a service speed at 90% MCR, with 15% sea margin, of 21knots. Each gearbox has a power take- off to a 1400kW alternator, with three 1615kVA diesel- driven sets also available. Two 1000kW bow thrusters ate also fitted.

Ro-to access is over the stern on to the main deck (No 3) using a divided stern ramp providing a 21m wide x 13.5m entry. A top-hinged stern door closes the access and is secured by automated, hydraulically actuated cleats. The main cargo space offers an unobstructed volume 120m long x 11m high x 21m wide to accommodate the A380 components, and extends between decks 3 and 5 with a hoistable trailer deck (No 4) available between, and reached by a hoistable ramp. A lower cargo hold between the tanktop (No 1 deck) and the main deck (No 3) is accessed by way of a ramp fitted with a hinged cover

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
 from the latter. This space contains a hoistable car deck (No 2), reached by a hoistable ramp.

TTS supplied the cargo access package, understood to weigh almost 930tonnes, together with hatch covers on decks 3 and 5, and specially designed mooring cylinders positioned at the stern, P&S. With a capacity of 50tonnes, these interface with shore connections and provide sufficient strength to withstand a 6knot current and a Beaufort 8 stern windforce. Hydraulic and mechanical operation of the system using highly advanced automation is arranged, and is linked with a sophisticated Kongsberg power management, control and monitoring system handling more than 4200 signals.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa... |
Length, bp...
Breadth, moulded ..
Depth, moulded to main deck (No 3) to upper deck (No 5)...
Width of double skin side bottom.
Draught ‘Airbus’ load.. ‘trailer load’ scantling
Gross
Displacement draught 5.5m.... draught 6.5m
Lightweight
Deadweight draught 5.5m .... draught 6.50m ..
Block coefficient draught 5.5m... draught 6.5m .
Speed, service, 91
Bunkers heavy oil.. diesel oil..
Water ballast.
Classification ...
 ... 11,518tonnes .14,585tonnes ....8600tonnes
 2270dwt 5200dwt
 .0.6573 -OOknots

Bureau Veritas Class | +HULL, +MACH, 
Ro-Ro cargo ship, Unrestricted Navigation, +STAR-HULL, +STAR-MACH, +AUT-IMS, +AUT-PORT, +SYS-NEQ 1, +SYS-IBS, +MON-SHAFT
Percentage of high-tensile
 steel used in construction..

Heel control system.......

Roll stabilisation system
 approx 30% ..Hoppe anti-heeling pump
Flume system and fins

Main engines
Design .... .Caterpillar Mak
MOE] 0... eeececeeeeeseseeeeeeeeeseeeeeseeesesesnseseseeeesensneeeneeees 9M43

Manufacturer..

Gearboxes
Make....

Speed .155. 1 rev/min

Propeller
Material ...
Designer/m
Number
 ...Nickel-aluminium-bronze . Rolls-Royce 2

Number
Make/type ..
Output/speed.
Diesel-driven alternators

Engine make/type..

Type Of FUCL eee cece eecseeseessescseserersesssenensereneneees HF

Output/speed. «3 X 1360kW/900rev/min
Alternator make/type . .AEM/SE 500 M8
Output/speed 15kVA/900rev/min

Boilers

Number 1 x thermal fuel heater; 2 x economisers
MAKG vr cncoccen cxorsnexinasnes oo enamas ecercenmmereneens es epaue Aalborg
Types 1 x 25-HO-08; 2 x EXV 740-20-57.0-600
 1 x 1200kW; 2 x 700kW

Output.. hydraulic

Mooring equipment.

Hatch covers
Design..
Manufac

Vehicles
Number of vehicle decks ...
Total lane length

Total area of deck..
Doors, ramps, moveable car decks
NUMDET .....cececeeeeeeseeeeeeeeee 1 x stern door, 1 x stern ramp, 2 x internal ramps, 2 x hoistable decks, 3 x shell doors
TTS

Cargo/ballast control systems
Make....
Type...

Complemen
Officers.
Crew..
Drivers..
Supernumaries
Single/double/other rooms .....

Bow thrusters

Make ....

One man operation ...

Fire detection system
Make.
Type...

Fire extinguishing systems

Cargo holds; engineroom; vehicle spaces..
 1 x 65608/A X-band; 1 x 65612/A S-band

Make... cece eecreseeeeseseeeessesesaeneessseseeeneeesssesieenees Litton
Waste disposal plant
Incinerator
Make... . Teamtec
 ‘OGS400C

Model..
Sewage plant
Make...
Model.. MSP25-Vacuum

Contract date.
Launch/float-o
Delivery date.
VOLCAN DE TAMASITE: inter-island ro-pax ferry for Canaries service

Shipbuilder: ... . Astillero Barreras (Hijos de

J Barreras SA), Spain

Vessel'S NAME? eee Volcan de Tamasite

Hull MUMDES: oo... cece ec eee eteeteeteeteeteeteeeeenees 1625

Owner/operator: .. Naviera de Jandia
 (Armas Group SA), 
Spain (Canary Islands)

D@SIQNEM: oo. eeeeeeeeeee Astillero Barreras, Spain

Model test establishment used:.............. MARIN, 
The Netherlands

FLAG! ceeeceeeceeceeeeteeteeeeeeteeeneensetenenteeseeaee Spain
Total number of sister
 ships already completed:.......c eee Nil
Total number of sister
 ships still On Order: wo... eee 1+ 1 option

STILLERO Barreras' reputation as a leader in the
 ferry-building sector is further advanced by the delivery of this first of a new series of vessels, designed for operation within the Canary Islands group, in this case providing a link between Gran Canaria and
Fuerteventura. This is a 2’/2-hour day service, for which seating is arranged for 514 passengers in lounges, 588 in airliner-type armchairs, and 328 on deck. In addition, 36 drivers are provided with separate facilities, and 34 crew members are carried.

All accommodation spaces ate on decks 6, 7 and 8, with decks 3 and 4, and hoistable car deck number 5, forming the vehicle space, laid out for 403 cars and 69 x 16m trailers. The tanktop (deck 1) and deck 2 are occupied by fuel tanks, void spaces, store rooms, stabiliser compartments, and the main machinery rooms.

The design of sister, Voldn de Timenfaya, currently building at Vigo, has been modified to provide the complementary night-time link between the islands, by having 100 cabins fitted in lieu of some of the seating.
With day-time use principally in mind for Volcan de
Tamasite, the interior designers have sought to provide passengers with different environments by introducing decorative partitions of wood and glass, with railings and curtains, and allowing easy circulation through wide, open galleries. The latter run the length of the ship, both sides.

In places, these partitions form seating clusters which can be segregated from other areas to suit business travellers. A self-service cafeteria operates on two levels: decks 6 (the lowest passenger deck) and 7, and an assortment of lounges is provided, including a forward panoramic lounge. Deck 6 is also the reception deck, and shares another feature with deck 7 in the form of a semi-circular lounge and bar aft. The forward end of this deck is the location of crew accommodation, and of the full-width wheelhouse.

Deck 8 tops off the superstructure and provides outdoor seating around the swimming pool, with windbreaks and a canvas awning affording protection as required. An upper restaurant and a terraced observation position on the wheelhouse top are additional features at this level.

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004

Ro-ro access is over the stern to deck 3, through two ramp/doors 8m wide x 16m long. Each ramp consists of a main section, overlaid with a second, hinged, 'fold- out’ extension which opens over the first. The ramps ate wide enough to allow the simultaneous transit of two vehicles 16m long and 54tonnes weight. Fixed ramps P&S, 38m long x 3.5m, link decks 3 and 4, whilst the hoistable car deck (No 5) which is formed of 11 sections, is accessed by lowering the end sections at the aft end, or via ramps within the sections forward.
Passenger access is by way of two shell doors.
Lifesaving equipment includes two 150-person enclosed lifeboats, and four 225-person marine evacuation systems, together with liferafts and rescue boats.

The machinery installation comprises two Wartsila 8L46C main engines developing 8400kW each when running at 500rev/min. Each shaft line drives through a clutchless gearbox, which reduces speed to 176rev/min at the twin CP propellers for a service speed at 90%
MCR of 22knots, and is also coupled to a 1200kW alternator. Two 900kW diesel-driven alternator sets are also fitted. Two underhung semi-balanced rudders are installed and two 1000kW bow thrusters are provided.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS

Length, oa
Length, bp
Breadth, moulded
Depth, moulded to main deck (No 8)... to upper deck (No 4). . tO DOCK 6 oeecececeeeccsereseeeeseeeerseetesseeeeseeeneeseenenes
Draught design scantling ..
Gross
Deadweight, gn...
Speed, service, 90% M
Bunkers
 heavy oil...
 diesel oil ve
Water ballast.. ..1685m*
Fuel consump 67tonnes/day

Classification .......  ssuunsteeen Bureau Veritas, Class 1, + Hull, + Mach, Ro-Ro Passenger ship, Unrestricted Navigation, AUT, UMS

Main engines
DOSIQN oo ecececee eects rete neesetesescsesteneeesesessseeeeeeeeeee Wartsila
Model .......... 8L46C
Manufacturer Wartsila
NUMDED oo. eecece ees ceceesesescseeeeeseeeseseesensnesesesestscseseesaeeeeea 2
Type of fuel. HFO
Output

Gearboxes
Make..... Reintjes
NUIMDES .....ceseccscsosreensanessssra sea stiaalasnaonsniaisansressanvevessaeees
 ..VA950 K41 HL/HR
 176rev/min
Propellers
Material ..Nickel-aluminium-bronze
Designer/manufacturer.. .Rolls-Royce
NUMER i sssicssces ses sencasaxsceus ves szesaensvezeas oun sepevesnonens anensns ueseorsee
Pitch...... Controllable
Diameter .. ..4200mm
Speed....
Main-engine driven alternators
Number-....

Leroy Somer LSA 52.2 L75/6P 2 x 1200kW

Make/type ....
Output/speed
Diesel-driven alternators

Engine make/type

Type Of fUe)l as cssccsscascascscan csnacnescasaas smears cnascnsasasaacascasd HFO
Output/speed... «2 X 1080KW/1000rev/min
Alternator make/type . Leroy Somer LSA 52.2 L60/6P
Output/speed 2 x 900kW/1000rev/min
Exhaust-gas scrubbing equipment
Manufacturer ... .Vulcano Sadeca
Location Main engines
Boiler
Number .
Type... ..0il fired
Make.. .Vulcano Sadeca
Output... 1500kg/h
Mooring equipment
NUMDET oe eecececeeeeeteeeeeteeees 2 x mooring winch/windlass 2 x mooring winch
Make .. .Servoship
Type... . hydraulic
Lifesaving equipment
NUMbE? uo. eects 4 x Viking 225-person vertical MES 4 x Hatecke 150-person lifeboats 2 x Hatecke fast rescue boats 2 x Hatecke rescue boats
Vehicles
 ..2 x fixed/1 x hoistable .1279m x 3m

Number of vehicle decks..
Total lane length ..

Total CAN Ss. sscsie sossassnseveunsscneaveaum oaseuseassanteoveenssxereescased 403
Total freight units. 69 x 16m trailers
Doors/ramps
NUMDET occ eeeeeeeteeeseeeeeeeees 2 x stern ramp/doors 2 x fixed ramps from deck 3 to deck 4 1 x hoistable car deck with ramps
De@SIQNER, cscsvcsssssssssscusass svsssssatecssenssesaswaveated SP Consultores
Complement
Officers..
Crew......
Single/double rooms
Passengers

One man bridge..
Fire detection system
Make..
Type...
Fire extinguishing system
Engineroom
Vehicle spaces.
Cabins/public spaces.
Make
Radars
Number..
Make..
Models ...
Waste disposal plant
Sewage plant
 .8 March 2004
July 2004

Launch/float-out date
Delivery date
 123
WAN QING SHA: multi-purpose, trailing- suction hopper/dredger

Shipbuilder: ...IHC Holland NV, The Netherlands
VeSSEl'S NAME? oo. ceeeceeceeeeteee Wan Qing Sha
Hull number: 0... 1238
CHEC-Guangzhou

Dredging Co, People's Republic of China

Designer........IHC Holland NV, The Netherlands
FIAQ! .eeceeeeeceeeeteeeeee People's Republic of China
Total number of sister
 ships already completed)... Nil
Total number of sister

Ships Still ON OFOP oc eee cece te teeeees Nil

ZAN Oing Sha is the 141st vessel to be built by

THC Holland for Chinese owners since one of its constituent companies delivered a bucket dredger to that market, 109 years ago. In more recent times, the relationship now existing between the Dutch market leaders and Guangzhou Dredging, part of the national
CHEC (China Harbour Engineering Co) Group, has ptoduced 12 dredgers, as well as associated equipment, with this latest vessel significant as the largest trailing suction hopper dredger in the fleet.

Designed to operate in the Pearl River Delta, Wan
Qing Sha is a twin-sctew, trailing-suction hopper design, incorporating environment-ftiendly features, and fitted with a trailing suction pipe on each side of the vessel, located towards the aft end of the hull, adjacent to the two 6000kW dredge pumps. These are driven via two- speed reduction gearboxes from the front end of twin
WaArtsila main engines developing a total installed power of 13,287kW. A feature of the pumps is the inclusion of a gas removal system.

The two ducted CP propellers have been supplied by
Rolls-Royce Benelux and provide a loaded service speed of 15.20knots. They are driven from the aft end of each engine through another pair of Jahnel-Kestermann reduction gearboxes, with each additionally providing power to an alternator. Two Rolls-Royce bow thrusters are fitted, and auxiliary alternators driven by two

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004

Caterpillar auxiliary diesel engines are also installed.

Wan Qing Sha is a single-decked vessel, built under joint Bureau Veritas and China Classification Society survey, and fitted with a forecastle, surmounted by an accommodation block arranged for a complement of 45 persons, and a wheelhouse with all-round vision.
The machinety room is tight aft, with the main engines linked through the forward bulkhead with the dredge pumps, positioned between that compartment and the open-topped hopper. This is constructed with high coamings, and incorporates hydraulically-operated overflow pipes controlled from the wheelhouse by the dredge master, and has high-pressure water jets to assist with fluidisation during discharge.

The hopper, contained within a double-skin structure designated as buoyancy and bunker spaces, has a capacity of 10,028m’ (14,684tonnes) at a dredging draught of 8.75m. Dredging is carried out using the 1000mm diameter port and starboard suction pipes which are suspended from gantries at the ship's side aft of midships, at a normal depth of 28m at 45deg. By first filling the hopper with water and then utilising pipe extensions, a maximum depth of 39m at 55deg can be reached. Both normal and extended sets of pipes are fitted with new-generation, excavating-type IHC dragheads.

Discharge of spoil from the hopper can be accomplished by any of three methods: either directly into the sea through two rows of eight conical doors fitted port and starboard in the hopper bottom, which is peaked at the centre to facilitate flow to the exits, or by way of a self-emptying system through a bow connection, direct to a shore pipeline. The third method is a derivation of this system which sprays the spoil through a bow-mounted jet nozzle in a 'rainbowing! action.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
 -128.00m -121.00m

Length, oa.
Length, bp....
Breadth, moulded
Depth, moulded ..
Dredging draught....
 14,684tonnes 10,028m?

Loaded capacity .....
Hopper capacity ..
Dredging depth 45deg working angle... 55deg working angle....
Speed, loaded..
Classification
 139M 15.20knots ..Bureau Veritas +Hull, +Mach, Hopper
Dredger (unrestricted navigation), and
China Classification Society

Main engines
Design..
Model...

Wartsila

Number....
Combined outpu
Gearboxes
 22 643kW
 2 x propulsion ... Jahnel-Kestermann
Reduction 2 x dredge pump
 .Reduction
Propellers
Manufacturer ..Rolls-Royce Benelux
Number. w.2 xX ducted
Pitch.. ..Controllable
Main-engine
Number od

Alternator make ..
Diesel-driven alternators

Engine make
Alternator make ...
Dredging equipment
Dredge pumps
Number

Power...

Make .
Complement
Bow thrusters
Number
 ..Rolls-Royce Benelux
Contract Date occ cece eesceneneeneseeneeenes March 2002
Launch date .. 4 February 2004
Delivery date .... 19 July 2004
 125
WORLD LION: another VLCC for
World-Wide Shipping

Shipbuilder: ....... cence Daewoo pupbuleng & Marine Engineering Co Lt
 (OSME), Korea

Vessel's name: World Lion

Hull number: ... 5228

Owner/operato

Singapore/Wo

DE@SIQNET: ooo. eeeee eet
Model test establishment: ..... se
Institute of Ships and

Ocean Engineering (KRISO), Korea

FAQ! ceeccccceseceseseeeeseteceteteteteneneneeseeseeees Hong Kong
Total number of sister
 ships already completed: ........ ce 1
Total number of sister

Ships still ON OFOOr: occ teeeeees 2

Fa this particular seties of VLCC tankers, World-
Wide Shipping has returned to DSME at the Okpo
Shipyard, and to a well-proven design developed by a builder which has made this size of vessel something of a speciality over recent years. Laid out with a single deck and no forecastle, but with a sunken aft deck serving as the mooring deck and as the base for the machinery casing, this design also features a double-skin hull formed of common side and double-bottom tanks. The latter are divided at the centreline to present port and starboard 'L- shaped’ compartments dedicated for water ballast use.
The connection of these tanks at the bilge is sloped in ‘bulk-carrier fashion’, to aid cargo drainage.

Within a double hull configuration (3.52m wide at the sides and 3.00m deep at the bottom), the cargo space is divided by five transverse and two longitudinal bulkheads into five sets of port, starboard and centre tanks, providing a total of 15 tanks protected by coal-tar epoxy coatings. These are separated from the machinery space by bunker and slop tanks, and a pumproom containing three Shinko, steam turbine-driven, 5000m’/h pumps, capable of working three cargo segregations through three manifolds on deck amidships. These are arranged so that the height of their centres above the waterline meets a maximum air draught of 22.50m in a normal harbour ballast condition. Ballast is handled by three 3000m°*/h electric pumps.

A five-tier deckhouse, surmounted by the wheelhouse, is positioned at the aft end and provides accommodation for 11 officers and 21 crew, plus a six-man Suez or repair crew. This structure is separated from the machinery

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004
 casing to avoid any noise and vibration problems ptoduced from a machinery installation centred upon a
MAN B&W 7S80MC Mk 6 main engine supplied by the
HSD Engine Co. Developing 25,480kW at 79rev/min, this produces a service speed of 15.30knots at 90% MCR and allowing a 15% sea margin. Electrical supply is from three 1180kW Hyundai alternators fitted with 1260kW
MAN B&W prime movers. Two Mitsubishi vertical water-tube boilers, each with an output of 4000kg/h, satisfy steam requirements.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa... “
Length, bp..
Breadth, moulded..
Depth, moulded.......
Width of double skin side... bottom
Draught design ... scantling
Gross ..
Displacemert..
Lightweight
Deadweight design ... scantling o
Block coefficient ..... . ..0.81
Speed, service at 90% MCR, 15% sea margin ...... 15.30knots
Cargo capacity
HiQUIGD VOIUMC.....eeseseececteeceseeseeeseesesseeteseeseeneaesee 352,000m*
Bunkers heavy oil... diesel oil
Water ballast...
Segregated ballast
Fuel consumption

MAIN ENGINE ONLY... eee eee 90.20%tonnes/day
Classification ..........06 American Bureau of Shipping +A1(E), Oil carrier ESP,SH, +AMS, +ACCU, UWILD

Percentage of high-tensile
 steel used in construction.. + 36%

Main engine
Design... MAN B&W
Model.....
Manufacturer HSD Engine Co
Number... saad
Type of fuel HFO
Output....... 5, 480kW/79rev/min
Propeller
Material Nickel-aluminium-bronze

DSME/Hyundai
Heavy Industries

Designer/manufacturer

Engine make..
Type of fuel

Output....... .3 x 1260kW
Alternator Make oo.cecccceeeeseeeteteeteseesesseseesseeeenees Hyundai .3 x 1180kW

INg
Centrifugal, vertical, electric motor drive, fitted on main engine
 vertical, water tube .Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 2 x 4000kg/h

Mooring equipment

NUMDET 0. eee neteseeeeeeeee 2 x mooring winch/windlass 8 x mooring winch
Make... .Rolls-Royce

Type .... ... Hydraulic
Cargo tank

Number 15 + 2 slops

Grades of car: Be)

Product range

C Coated tanks.
 argo pumps
Numb

Capacity.
Cargo control system
Make ...

Type
Complement
Officers
Crew ...
Suez/repair crew
Bridge control system
Make
Type.

Fire detection system .
 lake ....Consilium
Type. Addressable

Fire extinguishing systems
Engineroom High-expansion foam
Kashiwa
 -band: BR-3460CA-S312M
X-band: BR-3460CA-X28M

Integrated bridge system... No
Contract date ............. ..26 September 2001
Launch/float-out date.. 11 October 2003
Delivery date 8 January 2004
 127 7 i
 a
 2 rypala aoe i i

YAMAYURI: self-unloading coal carrier

Shipbuilder: ........... Imabari Shipbuilding Co Ltd
 (Koyo Dockyard), Japan
Vessel'S NAME... cece cece eeeteeteeteeees Yamayuri
Hull NUMDET: oo... ccceccceceseeseteeteeeeeteeteeeenes S-589

Owner/operator........ Bingo Kyodo Kisen Co Ltd;
Naigai Steam-Ship Co Ltd;

Japan Railway Construction, 
Transport and Technology Agency/ 
MOL Naikou Ltd, Japan

Model test establishment used: ......Shipbuilding
Research Centre of Japan

FAQ: wsnesseneenscesveneeseonss vesaeaneestsvresesausene serene Japan
Total number of sister
 ships already completed: ......... cece Nil
Total number of sister
 ships still OM OFd@r oo ee eee eeeeteneees Nil

PART from regular attempts to improve their self- ttimming qualities, the basic design of coal- carrying vessels changed little over the years, and it is only comparatively recently that radical design developments have taken place, centred mainly on the adoption of self-unloading techniques. Yamayuri, delivered by the Imabati group just too late to be included in Significant Ships of 2003, features such an atrangement, but takes it a stage further by incorporating measutes aimed at reducing the environmental impact caused by dust and noise generated during the loading and discharge operations.
Yamayuri is a single-decked vessel without forecastle, and presenting a rather 'dumpy' profile, characterised by a tall deckhouse right aft containing the accommodation and built over the machinery space.
Forward of this superstructure are substantial structures coveting most of the fore deck and incorporating the hoppers, belt conveyors, and machinery involved with the loading and discharging operations, both of which can be accomplished at a rate of about 4000tonnes/h. The double-hull incorporates large top and bottom wing tanks forming water ballast spaces and which enclose port and starboard cargo spaces, each presenting a diamond shape in cross- section, aimed at facilitating cargo flow to the belts.
Coal is loaded over the starboard side by a shore conveyor, directly into the ship's hopper, positioned just forwatd of the deckhouse. From here it is carried forward on an inclined conveyor belt into a tower structure at midships where it is transferred on to short transverse belts. These deposit the coal on to longitudinal conveyors which run above the port and statboard hold spaces. The cargo-handling equipment has been supplied by Mitsui Miike and includes two discharge machines, fitted forward, port and starboard on the tanktop in the cargo holds.

SIGNIFICANT SHIPS OF 2004

The machines are fitted with rotating curved blades which draw coal from the centre of the holds on to discharge belts at the bottom of the holds and these move it aft for transfer to vertical conveyors contained in towers at the aft end of the cargo holds, and then to an overside discharge boom operating at the port side of the vessel. This is stowed against the deckhouse structure when not in use.

Yamayuri is powered by a Mitsubishi two-stroke diesel engine of the 7UEC37LSII type constructed by
Akasaka Diesels Ltd; this develops 4600kW at 158rev/min MCR. When running at 85% of that output (3910kW/150rev/min), and with a sea margin of 15%, a service speed of 13.50knots is maintained.
The three diesel-driven Yanmat/Nishishiba alternator sets each produce 600kW at 900rev/min, and hot water supply comes from a Miura boiler heated from the main engine jacket water system. Nakashima Propeller supplied both the main propeller and the 123kW bow thruster, and a Schilling Vectwin rudder system is installed. The vessel is manned by only six officers and two crew, with accommodation provided for an additional four officers.

TECHNICAL PARTICULARS
Length, oa.. ve
Length, bp..
Breadth, moulded .
Depth, moulded ....
 bottom...
Draugft...
Gross ....
Deadweight
Speed, service, 85% MCR; 15% sea margin.
Cargo capacity

TAIN eee cece neeseseseseecseeeesesesesssssestassnesenenesees 16,651m°
 +2948 --6023m*

Fuel consumption main engine only .16.50tonnes.day auxiliaries (during voyage) ...1.50tonnes/day
Classification ..Nippon Kaiji Kyokai (Class NK), NS (coasting service) MNS*, MON, F
Percentage of high-tensile steel used in

COMSTIUCTION cc ccececeeetsenetsceseteeteeseeseeetessenaes approx 16%
Main engine

Design .. Mitsubishi

Model .... .7UEC37LSIl

Manufacturer . Akasaka Diesels Ltd
Number...
Type of fuel..
Output

Propeller
Material
Designer/manufacturer .
Number
 ..MDO
A600kKW/158rev/min

Number 3

Engine make/type «Yanmar/6N18AL-EV

Type Of FUL. eee ress eeseeeseseeesesesesseieessiesisieeiseceee MDO

Output/speed -3 x 66OKW/900rev/min

Alternator make/type .. ..Nishishiba/NTAKL-VC

Output .3 x 600kW/900rev/min
Boiler

Cargo handling equipment
Number ..
Make..

Mitsui Miike Machinery Co Ltd

Type ..Self-loading/unloading system

Performance... 4000tonnes/h (loading/unloading)
Mooring equipment

NUON ss ss sents sess svzonsoecases ens 2 x mooring winch/windlass
 4x mooring winch

Make... Kawasaki

Type... ..Electric-hydraulic
Ballast control system

MaKe... ee eeeceseeeeecsceereeseeeteeeeessesees Nakakita Seisakusho

TWD i ssssessrscrs ers os cons ces can emsorws exo corse oarannne communes Hydraulic
Complement

Officers 6

CreW... eee 2

Spare officers 4

Single rooms.... 212
Special rudders

Make .. Schilling

Type... ..Vectwin system
Bow thruster
 ....Nakashima Propeller

Bridge control system

Make..
Type... ARS-EIUT
One man operation ..... .No

Fire detection system
Make...
Type...

Fire extinguishing
Engineroom

Integrated bridge system.

Waste disposal plant
Incinerator

Make....
Model...
Sewage plant

Type..
Contract date
Launch/float-out date
Delivery date
 14 July 2003 ..12 September 2003 ..19 December 2003
 129